Why do people not know that vitamin D
deficiency can increase dementia risk by
80%. Why do people not know that having
a lack of this mineral is affecting
their long-term risk of cancer? Why do
people not know that having a low
omega-3 index is as bad for you in terms
of mortality as smoking? And as a
scientist, I've seen firsthand that 70%
of the way you're aging is actually due
to your lifestyle. And all these things
are so easy to do. So for example, as we
age, certain areas of the brain which is
involved in learning and memory starts
to shrink by about 1 to 2% per year. The
good news is studies show that people
being part of an exercise protocol, not
only did they not have their hippocampus
shrink, it actually grew by 1 to 2%. And
there's more. There are other things
that don't even require as much effort
as exercise, like supplements. And it's
been shown study after study that if you
take someone and you sleep deprive them
for 21 hours and give them 25 to 30
grams of creatine, not only does it
negate the cognitive deficits of sleep
deprivation, it makes people function
better than if they were well rested.
And then there's magnesium. There have
been studies showing that people with
the highest magnesium levels have a 40%
lower all-c cause mortality. And over
300 different enzymes in your body need
it to help with short-term survival. And
yet 50% of the population in the United
States does not have adequate levels of
magnesium. And there's still more.
There's saunas, red light therapy,
ketogenic diets, blueberries,
electrolytes. We can talk about all of
them.
>> Please.
>> Okay. So, I found when you go into this
sauna, something happens. That's
incredible. So,
I see messages all the time in the
comments section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So, please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So, yeah, thank
you.
>> Dr. Ronda Patrick, you strike me as a
fairly obsessed person.
What is it you're obsessed about and why
are you obsessed about it? Because I can
see from speaking to you previously how
passionate you are about the subjects
we're going to talk to about today. And
so I was I was um I was wondering what
it is about these subjects that is
driving you and what what you're trying
to accomplish.
>> I've learned through my experience. So I
have a PhD in biomedical science. I've
done research on aging, on cancer, on
metabolism, nutrition, neuroscience, a
lot of different fields, very
cross-disciplinary.
And I've realized over, you know, the
decades of doing research that there are
many different small changes that can be
made that have a really big impact on
our health, what's called our health
span. So, this is essentially being
disease-free uh throughout our life,
being healthy, feeling good. And I'm
sort of obsessed with trying to optimize
that and find a protocol to optimize it
and then share that information with the
world. And it's funny because, you know,
we live in a time now where we've got
access to so much information,
overwhelming amount of information. But
the reality is is that simple important
tools that people can do in their life
right now to drastically improve the way
they age are still not known to the
general population. And so my mission is
to get that knowledge to people so that
they can make these simple changes and
live healthier and feel better.
>> And what will be the impact on their
lives if they understand that
information and start to implement their
that information on a real sort of
specific practical
in a real specific practical sense.
>> Well, there are things that people are
deficient in, for example, that they
could simply take a supplement. Vitamin
D is a is a good example that could
affect their disease risk, their
dementia risk. I mean, so you're talking
about quality of life improvement
right now and also later. So, it affects
mood, it affects depression, and it
affects your neurodeenerative disease
risk risk like dementia and Alzheimer's
disease. So there are lowhanging fruits,
things that are simple that you can just
basically fill these gaps. I mean there
are things that are also a little more
effortful and this is where exercise
comes in where you put in this effort
and it just if you could pill up what
exercise does in a pill, I mean it would
be be the biggest blockbuster miracle
drug out there. I mean it blow ozic out
of the water. It'd be I mean just no
comparison. So, um I think I think that
you know again that it's it's these
little things that you can do that is
going to help with depression, help with
mood right now, make you feel better
right now, give you more energy, help
you be more focused, help you be more
motivated, but also affect your
long-term disease risk so that you know
when you're older in life, you're not
demented. And that affects you, it
affects your family. So I think I think
it's it's just an important it's so
important because there are easy things
that can be done that people just don't
know about.
>> Is there a psychological element to this
where we kind of see aging as an
inevitability so we don't fight it
because we only seem to interfere with
and fight and are motivated by things in
life there where we feel like we've got
an element of control and we see we see
everybody get old and we see everybody
start to you know lean over a little bit
and struggle to walk and get a little
bit more frail. So I think because we've
observed that so much over the last
couple of decades. I'm 30 years just
over 30 years old. I assume that will
happen to me. So I've seen my dad, you
know, get older, get a little bit more
large, lose his lean muscle. So I think,
well, I'm like my dad. I've got the some
of the same genetics. That's inevitable
for me.
>> So genetics does play a role in the way
you age, but it's a small role. In fact,
70% or more of the way you're aging is
actually due to your lifestyle. Let's
just imagine two 70ish year old men,
okay? John and Rob. And John, you know,
he's razor sharp. He can carry groceries
to his car. He doesn't get out of
breath. You know, I mean, he's he's
feeling healthy. He's be able to he can
walk efficiently, right? And then
there's Rob. And Rob is
forgetting his words. You know, he's not
cognitively sharp. He's out of breath
just from walking to his car. He has a
really hard time carrying groceries.
Genetics only plays a small role in in
those two different outcomes for those
two men. The biggest, I would say, thing
that's dictating the way these two men
age is their lifestyle, with a huge part
of that actually being exercise. Mhm.
>> And you know, I know we've all heard it
from our mother or grandmother,
great-grandmother. You know, exercise is
is good for you. If you eat healthy and
you exercise, you're going to you're
going to be healthier. And that's like a
general statement, but the reality is it
is so true that exercise affects
everything, you know, down to the
molecular level in terms of like the way
you're aging. So, um, no, it's not just
dictated by genetics and it's not
inevitable and there are things that you
can do to dramatically age better.
>> So, let's play a little a little game
here. So, imagine that I listened to
your advice and the things that you know
about health, longevity, aging, um, and
I followed all of them, which is very
hard to do because, you know,
implementation is is not the same thing
as knowledge. So, imagine that's person
A, that's Steve A, and then there's
Steve B. I do the exact opposite. Based
on what you know about the science and
about outcomes and expected outcomes,
how would Steve A that followed your
advice
live his uh live his life as he ages?
And how would Steve's B, how would his
outcomes be as he ages? Like what would
you if you had to obviously this is like
super you're forecasting here and it's
hypothetical, but what do you think the
variance in these two people's lives
would be? Well, if you're talking about
the extreme ends, like if Steve B was
like eating sugar and smoking and
drinking and just obese and sedentary,
everything that you don't want to,
>> which is like a lot of the population.
>> I mean, then you're talking like a
14-year difference in life expectancy,
which is pretty big. But not just life
expectancy,
the way your your independence, right,
your your mind, so you'd be forgetful. I
mean, it would just be it would it would
be a terrible quality of life, right?
So, it's not only are you going to die
earlier, you're not you're just not
going to live a good quality of life.
So, so Steve A might be into his 90s and
out surfing, you know, because you're
you've exercised, you've you've given
your body like the right nutrients that
it needs, you've gotten good sleep,
you're not overweight, you're not eating
a lot of refined sugar, all these things
that sort of accelerate the aging
process. And we can talk about different
components of this and how they do
affect the way we age and our disease
risk, but I mean there's there's studies
that show even like a 14-year difference
in life expectancy for like someone
who's morbidly obese versus lean.
>> So Steve A could be out surfing at 90
and Steve B would be potentially dying
at 75, but also his quality of life
would his health span would diminish
probably in his 40s and 50s,
>> right?
So it's really it's a 14year reduction
in lifespan but potentially a 30 40 year
reduction in health span
>> in quality of life and health span being
able to be functionally independent
being able to be cognitively sharp feel
good right and your mood I mean all
these things are affected
>> you must be sitting on some some crazy
ideas because as a biomedical science
you can kind of see as a biomedical
scientist you can see some of the
research and technology that's coming
down the pipe so I'm wondering Before we
get into the the conversation, are there
any big ideas about the future of aging
and longevity that are in your mind that
you think about that are actually really
important to know because as Brian
Johnson has often said to me,
you want to live to to see these
breakthroughs.
>> Yes. Yes. I am excited about some gene
therapies and being able to sort of
reprogram our our cells to be more
youthful. So, you know, this is this is
something that was pioneered back in
2006 by Shinya Yamanaka from Japan and
he actually won the Nobel Prize. Why his
research was so important for the field
of aging wasn't really known at that
time. What he had shown is that you
could take a cell that's old and it
could be a any cell. It could be from an
85year-old person with Parkinson's
disease, for example, and you get it.
You know, we're constantly getting skin
cells and sloing them off every day. You
can take one of those cells and add four
different proteins to them. They're
called transcription factors.
Essentially, all that means is they're
kind of like master orchestrators of
many different genes in your body and
how genes are activated and turned on
and doing what they're supposed to or
they're turned off and quiet for the
time that they're supposed to be quiet.
And it's you you add those four proteins
and you can take that 85year-old cell
skin cell from a person with Parkinson
disease and you can make it into what's
called an embryionic stem cell. And it
does that by sort of wiping out the
what's called epiggenome. So people are
familiar with their DNA, right? Well,
the epiggenome is something that sort of
sits on top of your DNA and it
regulates, you know, how your genes are
being expressed or turned on and off,
right? And it sort of brings it back,
reprograms it to this youthful state
where it becomes an embryionic stem
cell. And then that embryionic stem cell
can then form any type of cell in the
body. you can form a heart cell or a
liver cell or a brain cell or a cell
from your eye and so this is called
induced pur potent stem cells and this
was a breakthrough at the time because
it's it was so import it's important for
cell regenerative therapies okay let's
say someone does have Parkinson's
disease and you want you know
Parkinson's disease people are losing
dopamineergic neurons and their
substantia so these are dopamine
producing neurons and dopamine is
important for motivation and it plays a
role in our, you know, cognitive
function, but it's also important for
movement, right? So, um, people with
Parkinson's disease are losing those at
a rapid rate and they lose control of
their motor capabilities. And so, you
want to be able to take an old skin cell
from someone, reprogram it to become a
dopamine neuron and then inject it into
that person, right? It's their own cell,
so they're not going to reject it,
right? So, that was like the big thought
at the time. Fast forward, you know, a
decade or so and a a whole handful of
brilliant aging scientists have
discovered that instead of taking these
old cells and putting these four
proteins on it to become this sort of
stem cell, they can pulse it. Just a
quick little pulse.
>> What is a pulse? Like an electronic
shock?
>> No, what I mean is it's just not
incubated for as long of a time period.
So, it's a shorter time interval that
you're putting these four different
transcription factors on top of the cell
that reprogram it, right? And the reason
for the shorter time is that you don't
want it to lose its cellular identity.
So, let's say it was a skin cell. You
want it to stay a skin cell, not become
an embryionic stem cell, but you want it
to be a skin cell from a one-year-old,
not an 85y old.
>> So, the way to do that is what's called
partial reprogramming. And so they
basically researchers have found that
you can just sort of what I call pulse.
It's partial reprogramming. You're kind
of putting it on for like a shorter
period of time and then that cell keeps
its identity but it's youthful. It wipes
out all the damage, everything that's
accumulated over those those 85 years.
And this has been shown in animal
studies in rodents that if you if you
add these four different transcription
factors and you give them to mice, you
can rejuvenate many of the different
organs. So essentially turning back the
aging clock in different organs in these
mice. Now this obviously has to be
translated to humans, but I think it's
super exciting and I do think it's the
future in terms of solving aging and
rejuvenation, rejuvenating our organs.
And so it's something that I'm pretty
excited about and following closely.
>> And are they then living longer?
>> Some of these studies were done in
animals that are what's called
accelerated aging. So yes, they were
living longer in that background of
accelerated aging. Um the question is,
you know, can they live longer if it's
just a normal mouse that's not like an
accelerated aging model? And and these
are things that are all being done right
now. These sorts of studies are in
progress.
Where do you think is the most important
place for us to start this conversation
based on everything you know and maybe
some of the presumably there's some like
foundational stuff, right?
>> I do. I think the important place to
start would be we're talking about we
were talking about aging as a disease
and I think being sedentary is a disease
and I think that's a good place to
start. What I mean by being sedentary is
not physically active. someone who
doesn't engage in any type of physical
activity.
>> And what is the spectrum there of, you
know, someone who doesn't move at all
for, you know, 24 hours a day versus
you've got obviously someone that's
constantly running marathons and doing
crazy stuff, but where is where are most
of us on that scale? And are we moving
enough?
>> Most of us are not moving on that
enough. And most of us are, if you're
talking about globally, we're on that
sedentary scale where we're just not
physically active. we sit at our
computer or our desk or our cubicle, you
know, all day and we're not we're not
actually moving around a lot. Um, and I
say I say sedentaryism
is a disease because it's actually been
shown to
increase the risk of early mortality
even more than diseases that we know of
like type two diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, or even terrible habits like
smoking. So being sedentary actually
could predict early mortality even more
than those diseases. But it it it's
let's take a step back. It's even bigger
than that. There there's this amazing
study. It's called the Dallas bed rest
study. And the study started back in the
1960s. And this is done by probably the
world's most talented cardiovascular
exercise physiologists.
And so Ben Saltine, uh, Jerry Mitchell
were involved in this early study in the
1960s. And what they did was they took
five men, they were college students and
they put them on bed rest. And this is
like 3 weeks of legitimate bed rest.
We're talking they couldn't get up to go
to the bathroom, so they had catheter in
them. They did not move for three week.
The researchers wanted to find out what
happens to your cardiovascular system if
you are not moving around for three
weeks. And now if you think about it,
you know, there's a lot of people that
are undergoing surgery or they have some
sort of bad illness, influenza or
something that keeps them bedridden for
it's not unusual to be 3 weeks to be
honest. So it's not completely
irrelevant.
And what was found is after that 3
weeks, you know, their cardiovascular
system was just tanked. And one of the
major they they were probably the some
of the most wellstied men at the time.
And um one of the biggest factors that
was measured was their cardiorespiratory
fitness. This is often called V2 max.
And essentially it's the maximum amount
of oxygen that you can breathe in and
your lungs then breathe that oxygen to
your muscles. And it's measured during
maximal exercise. You're putting in a
maximum effort and that's called your
cardiorespiratory fitness. And we can
talk a little bit more about that. But
their cardiorespir respiratory fitness
tank. And now I mentioned this was in
the 1960s. About 30 years later, and
this is where uh Ben Lavine came into
the study. He's at the UT Southwestern
in Dallas. He's also very one of the
most famous, you know, cardiovascular
exercise physiologists out there right
now. They found these five men from 30
years earlier and they measured their
cardiorespiratory fitness and a variety
of other parameters that they had
measured at the time. And what they
found was that three weeks of bed rest
was worse on their cardiorespiratory
fitness than 30 years of aging. So
essentially their cardiorespiratory
fitness was no worse 30 years later than
it was after their 3 weeks of bed rest
which is kind of amazing because you
would think that the 30 years of aging
would be worse on your cardiorespiratory
fitness than the three weeks of bed
rest. And it's the same the same
individuals,
>> the same individuals, the same five men.
Um, now after the three weeks of bed
rest, you know, back back in the 1960s,
they were able to get their
cardiorespiratory fitness back up again
once they started exercising and moving
around and it took a while. But when you
look at their baseline levels, their
baseline cardiorespiratory fitness and
you compare it to their
cardiorespiratory fitness baseline 30
years later, it wasn't worse than what
happened when they they compared it to
the 3 weeks of bed rest. And you might
go, well,
why is that so significant? The
cardiorespiratory fitness dropping. We
know that cardiorespiratory fitness is
one of the best predictors of longevity.
So there are studies that have shown
that people with a high
cardiorespiratory fitness
live five years longer than people with
a low cardiorespiratory fitness. That's,
you know, pretty big difference. They're
they're basically 80% less likely to die
of many different causes of of death. So
cardiovascular disease, cancer,
respiratory disease, things like that
than people with a low cardiorespiratory
fitness. So you're really getting, you
know, a five-year increased life
expectancy. You're sort of pushing and
delaying those age related diseases like
cardiovascular disease, you know, like
cancer, for example, you're pushing them
down later in life. So you're not you're
not dying from them sooner. And we do
know that really
just going getting anywhere out of that
low cardiorespiratory fitness. So people
with the low cardiorespiratory fitness
are people that are sedentary. And if
you just move anywhere above that, even
if you're going low from low bad to like
low normal, you're gaining about two
years increase in life expectancy. And
that's not really that hard to do. But
if you think about cardiorespiratory
fitness, like right here, just having
this conversation, actually even just
sitting quietly, it takes about three
milliliters of oxygen per minute per
kilogram body weight to do that. to
carry groceries to your car, it takes
about 11 milliliters of oxygen per
minute per body weight, per kilogram
body weight.
>> And so as you're aging, you're kind of
heading towards this cliff, right?
Because your cardiorespiratory fitness
goes down with age. It does. That's what
happens naturally. If you're at the
point where you don't work on your
cardiorespiratory fitness, if you're not
being physically active, and there are
certain exercises that are better at
improving cardiorespiratory fitness than
other others, if you're not trying to
improve it, you're going to be heading
towards that cliff faster. And then
everything becomes a maximal effort.
You're out of breath just talking.
You're out of breath carrying groceries
to your car. Everything is a maximal
effort. And you don't want to be there.
You don't that that quality of life is
not good. It's not good. Right. And then
on top of that, you're also going to die
sooner. So you're talking about two
things here. You're talking about
decreased health span and decreased
lifespan.
>> So yeah, we should be moving more,
>> right? And the question is, well, how do
you improve your cardior fitness? Right.
Yeah. I mean,
>> do you lift weights? Do you go for runs?
Do you bike? What is it that is really
good at improving cardior fitness? And
that's the question that a lot of
exercise physiologists have answered
over the last couple of decades. You
want to do and engage in what's called
vigorous intensity exercise. So this is
the kind of exercise where you're not
able to have a conversation when you're
engaged in it. Right? So so your heart
rate is going up to about 80% your max
heart rate. You're not able to really
talk. And it's I would say you know it's
something that can be done in intervals.
So you can do highintensity interval
training. So you have these intervals
where you're getting your heart rate up,
you're doing vigorous exercise, and then
you have recovery periods where you're
kind of resting. You're you're lowering
your heart rate. You're not doing that
max that maximal sort of exercise. And I
say this because
there have been studies, multiple
studies that have shown people that
engage in moderate intensity exercise.
So this is the kind of exercise when you
can you're breathy, but you can still
kind of have somewhat of a conversation
while you're doing it.
>> Like the stair master. like the
stairmaster. Yeah, exactly. Um, even
people that are engaging in that type of
exercise for two and a half hours a
week, so this is following the physical
activity guidelines, 40% of those people
can't improve their cardiorespiratory
fitness.
And it's like, well, I don't know about
you, but like I don't want it to be a
coin toss in terms of like if I'm doing
that kind of exercise, well, if I have a
50% chance of not improving my
cardiorespiratory fitness if I'm doing
this. I want the sure thing. And the
short thing is you take those people and
then you have them engage in
highintensity interval training and
they're able to improve their
cardiorespiratory fitness. And that's
because
you you're putting a stronger stress on
your cardiovascular system. And so the
adaptations are greater. And part of the
adaptations are you're able to bring in
more oxygen, carry it to your muscles,
carry it to your your you know other
other tissues better. And so that's your
cardiorespiratory fitness. Uh and so and
so that's that's really I would say um
the bottom line here is engaging in even
just once or twice a week. And I would I
would say the the most wellressearched
protocol for that would be something
called the Norwegian 4x4.
And that is where you're doing a longer
interval. It's a 4-minute interval and
it's best done on either a stationary
bike or maybe a rowing machine. And
you're going as hard as you can and
maintain that intensity for four
minutes. And then you're going to go
down to light exercise and recover for
four minutes and let your heart rate go
down. And you do that four times. So
it's a four by four. And that is
probably one of the most robust ways to
improve cardiorespiratory fitness. But
there are other ways even doing you know
one minute on one minute off. So you do
one minute as hard as you can go again
for that entire minute. not going all
out, but as hard as you can and maintain
that for the entire minute. And then you
rest a minute and you do that, you know,
10 times. So, it's a 20-minute workout.
>> So, for the several million people that
are listening right now, if you had to
prescribe them all something to do and
it was the minimum they had to do.
Tell me what exactly the workout would
look like and how frequent it would be
on a weekly basis.
>> I would say the minimum effective dose
would be once a week. Okay.
>> And it would probably be
the one minute on, one minute off. If
you want like the upper end robust
effects of improving cardiorespiratory
fitness, you can still improve it with
something like a Tabata.
>> What's a Tabata?
>> Where you're doing a 20 second interval
and you're going more all out because
it's shorter time and then you're
recovering for 10 seconds.
>> So, it's a 20 second on, 10 second off.
You do that eight times. And um if you
repeat that twice, so it's essentially a
10-minute workout, that's also something
that can improve cardiorespiratory
fitness. But I would say, and I'll tell
you I'll tell you why. There's the
minimum, right? So the one minute on,
one minute off. But I would say the
Norwegian 4x4 is the gold standard. And
that's because it's not only improving
cardiorespiratory fitness.
This is probably one of the most
exciting
pieces of evidence I've seen with
respect to, you know, exercise and
aging. And that is that being part of an
exercise protocol was shown to reverse
the structural changes that occur with
age in the heart by 20 years.
So what do I mean by that? I mean,
people that were 50 years old that were
sedentary, so they weren't really going
to the gym, they weren't engaging in any
sort of physical activity, but they
weren't, you know, they didn't have
diseases. They didn't have type two
diabetes, they didn't have
cardiovascular disease. I would argue
sedentary, being sedentary is a disease,
but putting that aside, they didn't have
any diseases, right? And they're 50, so
they're midlife.
And um this was again this was done by
Ben Lavine out of UT uh Southwest at in
Dallas. He took these you know
50-year-olds and put them on a pretty
intense exercise routine for two years
or a stretching routine. This was like
the the control.
And this type of exercise routine was
progressive. So they started out lighter
and sort of worked their way up, right?
Like you don't want to just start with a
Norwegian 4x4 people that never never
exercise. I mean that's going to be
tough. So it was a progressive sort of
building up to that. But um towards the
ends of about the first six months,
these people were exercising about 5 to
six hours a week and that included one
to two sessions of the Norwegian 4x4.
And it also included a lot of, you know,
they're they're doing moderate to
vigorous intensity cycling or running
and some some strength training as well.
And they did this for two years.
their hearts were looked at and so as we
age our hearts shrink and they get
stiffer and that plays a role in causing
cardiovascular disease. I mean that's
the number one killer in the United
States. It also affects
cardiorespiratory fitness right why does
the the heart you know stiffen with time
has a lot to do with actually being
exposed to a lot of glucose when you're
eating a lot of refined sugar and
refined carbohydrates you're having a
lot of glucose around in your system.
This causes a chemical reaction called
glycation. So you get these advanced
glycation end products that sort of
react with your collagen that's lining
your heart and your mocardium and it
causes it to stiffen and so now the
heart can't really respond to stress
well. It's stiff and that plays a role
in like heart attacks for example. So
exercise is one of the best things you
can do to
move glucose out of your vascular system
and get it to your muscles. And so
that's that's one of the things that it
does and helps with not causing that
stiffening of the heart. And so
essentially these 50-year-olds had
their their heart the structure so it
was bigger and less stiff after two
years of this you know exercise
protocol. It essentially made their
hearts look like 30 year olds. And I
mentioned they were 50 year olds. I
mean, that's amazing. That's incredible
that you can take someone midlife, put
them on a two-year training protocol,
and reverse the aging of their heart by
20 years.
>> So, on this Norwegian 4x4,
you've convinced me to give it a shot.
But specifically, how I how I do that.
So, it's it's I do my warmup and then I
do four minutes of hard exercise. I take
a break and the exercise I'm doing in
those four minutes can be any number of
things but I just have to get up to 85
80% of my exertion levels 80%
difficulty.
>> So the way it works is as they mentioned
it's it's best if you're doing a
cardiovascular type of exercise. So like
>> the assault bike
>> you could do assault bike. Yep. Assault
bike. You can do a rowing machine. You
could do uh stationary cycling machine
as well.
>> Could I run?
You can, but that is is it's definitely
um it's I think it's better on on doing
like maybe a bike or a salt bike or
something. Um but you can run like what
whatever it is that you like to do and
you are going as hard as you can for
that four minutes and maintain within
that four minutes. So it's not an allout
or it's far from all out, right? But
you're not really having a conversation
while you're doing it. And then the four
minutes of recovery, you're if you're
running, you kind of go down to walking.
If you're on the rowing machine or the
assault bike, you're just going very
slow. You're just really going slow and
you're letting your heart rate come
down. You're letting your muscles kind
of recover, your cardiorespiratory
fitness, you know, kind your your
cardiorespiratory fitness system recover
somewhat. And then after that 4-minute
recovery, you go back to the four
minutes of like intense again. And
you're doing that four times. It's not
easy, but you know, people can start
out, they don't I mean, even if you
start out with not going super super
hard in those four minutes where you
just maybe you can have a conversation,
but you're still going hard harder than
you're used to pushing yourself. And I
think for people that haven't really
engaged in any type of high-intensity
training before, that's a good idea
where you kind of you got you can't just
start doing it
>> right out the gate. You want to kind of
work your way up that. So doing the four
minutes do just try to put in as much
effort as you can right during those
four minutes and then you do your
recovery and you repeat that four times
but then work your way up as you as you
do it one week, two weeks, you know, a
month later, two months later and really
try then to get to that point where
during those four minutes you're
getting, you know, you're pushing
yourself hard where you're not really
able to have that conversation
>> and physiologically what is going on in
my body when I get to that 85 90% effort
range and I and I stay there for a
couple of minutes. That doesn't occur
when I'm doing my stair master.
>> I mean, so many things are are
happening. I mean, there's a lot of
different, I would say, physiological
responses that are
>> You've got a big smile on your face when
I ask.
>> Yes, I do because it's, you know, one of
my favorite things to talk about and it
has to do with when you're when you're
pushing yourself really hard, you need
you need to make energy, right? And the
way that most of our cells make energy,
like our muscles, is by using our
mitochondria, these are tiny organels
inside of our cells that produce energy,
but they need oxygen to do it. So that's
where the oxygen comes into play. When
you start to push yourself really hard,
you can't get the oxygen to your muscles
quick enough, but you need to make the
energy. And so your body decides to make
energy in the form of ATP without the
mitochondria, and it uses glucose to do
that.
and you're not making as many of those
ATP energy molecules, but you're still
making them and you're making them
quick. And that's what your your body
wants to do. And and so it's using
glucose to do that without the
mitochondria,
but as a byproduct, it's making
something called lactate. And this is
what gets me so excited because, you
know, for the longest time, lactate was
thought to be this just metabolic
byproduct of glucose metabolism. you
know where you're when you're pushing
yourself really hard anorobic it's
called anorobic by the way you're not
you're not only anorobic you're just
some somewhat anorobic you're still use
producing energy with your mitochondria
it's just you're also producing without
the mitochondria it's not like a a sort
of black black and white sort of thing
right it's a little bit gray
>> but the reality is you're producing
something called lactate and for the
longest time it was thought this lactate
oh it's just it's bad because you know
it can form lactic acid and that burns
forms that burn in your muscles. And you
know, this was, you know, decades ago.
And we now know from the work of George
Brooks out of UC Berkeley that lactate
itself isn't causing the burn. And not
only is it not causing the burn, it's
like a miracle molecule that's being
made. This metabolite lactate gets into
your circulation and it gets consumed by
your heart, by your brain, by your
liver, and it's used for energy. It's
very it's it's very much similar to beta
hydroxybutyrate that ketone body that
you always hear about people talk about
when they're fasting or doing a
ketogenic diet. It's actually very
similar to that. It gets used it gets
transported through the same transporter
and it's used like energy. Very similar
to that. Um but what's more exciting is
that lactate is a way for your muscles
to communicate with other organs like
the brain. And it's called a signaling
molecule. So, it's your muscles are
going, I'm working really hard. This is
really hard. We have to respond to this
work. We have to adapt. And so, your
body goes, okay, I got to like turn on
all this awesome stuff that I have
because I'm working so hard. I need to
respond to that so that like I'm I'm
good, right? And so, what happens is the
lactate, this has been shown, it gets
consumed a lot by the brain. And in the
brain, it it activates something called
brain drive neurotrphic factor, BDNF.
And this is kind of like a miracle grow
for your brain. So essentially, it's
able to increase the growth of new
neurons, which is amazing. It's called
neurogenesis. It increases the
connections between neurons. So it
improves memory, cognition, and then um
it's involved in what's called
neuroplasticity. So the ability of your
brain to adapt to a changing
environment. This is all from lactate.
Um, and it also increases
neurotransmitters like norepinephrine,
so focus and attention, serotonin, your
your mood, you're feeling better,
you're, you know, motivated. All these
things are happening because of lactate.
And there's been studies in humans
showing that people that are compared
working hard, working out hard, vigorous
exercise versus sort of moderate to
light exercise, they make more lactate.
And that lactate, you know, it's been
shown that high levels of lactate are
correlated with improved cognition
scores, uh, improved impulse control. So
serotonin plays a role in impulse
control. So you're able to not just go
on your impulse, right? You're you're
able to kind of like, which is great if
you want more focus and attention,
right? So this is this is all really
exciting stuff because it all comes down
to just it's it's like your muscles are
these little chemical pharmaceutical
factories and the way to make them make
these pharmaceuticals is to work them to
challenge them and that can be done with
an easy highintensity interval training
protocol. A variety of them Norwegian
4x4 can increase brain drive neurotrphic
factor that's been shown. The one minute
on one minute off protocol also has been
shown to increase that again through the
lactate. So that's one of the big sort
of I would say differences between
vigorous intensity exercise and more of
that moderate intensity or like low
intensity exercise. And I honestly
think, you know, I think the guidelines,
you know, everyone's sort of obsessed
with steps. I need to get my 10,000
steps in, my 10,000 steps. And they have
wear wearable devices, and I think
that's great, but I think we need to
change the 10,000 steps to at least 10
minutes of vigorous intensity exercise.
like you could do 10 minutes of, you
know, any type of exercise that's really
going to get your heart rate up and it's
going to be so much better. So, this is
a really dumb question, but it's the
question that I had in my mind, which is
if lactate is such a miracle
drug,
why can't I just drink it? Why can't I
just get get a shot of lactate versus
having to go through vigorous interval
training? It's a great question,
Stephen, because um there have been
studies that have been done looking at,
for example, traumatic brain injury
patients. So, people that have undergone
some sort of head trauma and they've
infused sodium lactate through like an
IV
into their, you know, system and the
lactate immediately gets consumed by the
brain and it's been shown to improve
their recovery. So, it's called the
Glasgow score. You may have heard of it,
but it's kind of essentially this
battery of tests that's done to sort of
assess how someone's recovering from
traumatic brain injury. And the sodium
lactate does improve that. So there are
you can find out there, you know,
different types of lactate that you can
consume.
>> And theoretically, it should help, but
what happens is when you consume the
lactate,
>> lactate actually gets used by the gut.
So a lot of it's going into the gut
cells before it gets into your
circulation. There's always a trade-off
with these bloody things whenever you
try and trick the system or shortcut the
system by like drinking something. I
feel like there's a trade-off which
people don't talk about a lot.
>> Well, the thing is is that I it is good
for the gut. In fact, a former colleague
of mine, Mark Chanaga, has shown that
lactate is really beneficial for for uh
the gut epithelial cells. In fact, if
you think about it, all these sort of
beneficial probiotic bacteria like
bifido bacterium for example, they're
producing lactic acid and that lactic
acid does get converted into lactate.
It's sort of like this physiological
homeostasis where you have uh the
difference of just a hydrogen atom. So
you're having lactic acid and lactate
sort of in this equilibrium so to speak.
But um those those bacteria in your gut
are making lactate essentially. And the
reason it's so good is because it is an
very e easily utilizable source of
energy for the gut cells. So, not to
like go off on a tangent here, yes,
there is always a tradeoff, especially
for doing something orally, but when it
comes to exercise,
there's so like I mentioned when we
first started talking about exercise, if
you could pill up what exercise does,
I mean, it's so many things, right? It's
not just the lactate.
>> Yeah.
>> So many different things, so many
different adaptations that occur. I mean
it would be a miracle drug. So there's
you're not just getting the lactate,
you're getting the, you know, the
improvement in cardiorespiratory
fitness. You're getting the muscular
response, right? The adaptations to your
muscle. Um you're you're increasing
stress response genes like heat shock
proteins that are important for
preventing neurodeenerative disease.
You're making antioxidants because the
inflammation that you're generating
while you're exercising. There's
hundreds and hundreds of things that are
happening all in concert from exercise
and you just can't you can't pill it up.
>> I have another really silly question
which is if lactate and these other
things even like creatine and you know
all these other things are so good for
me why doesn't my body just make more of
it?
>> I mean your body does make it. The the
problem is is that you know as we're
aging everything becomes less efficient.
everything doesn't do what it used to do
as well as it did when it was younger.
Um, and it and also in the in the case
of creatine, which we can talk about,
you know, later if you're interested,
then um, you know, your body only makes
so much of it. And
>> why doesn't it make more?
>> I don't, you know,
>> maybe I'm not giving it the the minerals
or the environment it needs naturally to
make more.
>> I don't know.
>> You you get it from your food, too.
Creatine is found in meat, in poultry,
and fish. So, probably that's why your
body doesn't make more of it because it
knows you're going to be getting it from
your diet as well.
>> And so, that is another way to get
creatine.
>> Okay.
>> Of course, the vegans and the
vegetarians, that's a whole other
ballgame because they aren't eating meat
and so they're really essentially only
relying on what their body can make.
>> We'll definitely talk about that later.
Um on this point of the brain then if if
I I don't want to be an older person who
can't remember things and stutters over
my words and falls into cognitive
decline. And I'm I'm 32 now. So I'm I
feel like I'm at a moment in time where
I can really make decisions now that
have a really big impact on my
90-year-old brain and my ability to
think straight and clearly and remember
things. Are there things that I can be
doing now that will have a profound
impact on my cognitive performance at
90?
>> Yes. And what are those things?
>> Absolutely. Well, first of all, just to
kind of wrap up the exercise story
because I think this study is so
profound and in fact it wasn't done in
32 year olds. It was done in older
adults. So, we're talking 60 year olds
or a little bit older. And these
individuals were put on a aerobic
exercise training program for one year
that was more of like a 70 to 75% max
heart rate. It wasn't so vigorous, but
it was pretty pretty vigorous for them,
right? And um the the basis of this
study was to look at brain aging. As we
age, I mentioned our heart aging, right?
It gets stiffer and shrinks with age.
Our brain also shrinks with age. It's
called atrophy. And as we age,
especially starting in midlife, so
around the age of 50, your your brain
and certain areas of the brain like the
hippocampus, which is involved in
learning and memory, starts to shrink by
about 1 to 2% per year.
>> I don't want that to happen.
>> Same. Same. The good news is um in this
study, after a year of this sort of
aerobic exercise training program, they
were doing three times a week about 30
minutes a day. Really not even that
intense. these individuals and then
there was a control group that was kind
of the stretching they like to use the
stretching as the control group. So that
let's talk about the the control group,
the stretching group. They did lose
about 1 to 2% in terms of the size of
their hippocampus, it shrunk one to 2%
after that year, which is what you would
expect normally. However, the group that
was training, not only did they not have
their hippocampus shrink by 1 to 2%, it
actually grew by 1 to 2%. which comes
down to that neurogenesis, that growth
of new neurons, the brain drive
neurotrphic factor that's able to do
that. You're actually able to grow new
neurons even when you're in the age of
50, which is amazing. It's incredible.
So, that study I love because a couple
of reasons. one, it shows that it's
possible to not only stave off, you
know, some of the components of brain
aging, but to reverse it and increase
it, right, through exercise. And number
two, I love it because it's never too
late. Like, you can start this, you
know, in your 60s and still have a
benefit, right? you're you're talking
about being in your 30s, but you know,
some people watching this show,
listening to the show, may already be in
their 50s or 60s, right? So, it's never
too late.
>> Um, likewise, you know, we're talking
about being cognitively sharp and not
getting dementia. There's also studies
showing that people like women that were
brought into the lab, they had their
cardiorespiratory fitness measured,
those women with the highest
cardiorespiratory fitness were 80% less
likely to come down with dementia over
the follow-up period of time. So it
again, I think exercise is one of the
big ones when it comes to brain aging.
But you asked an important question. and
you say, "What can I be doing now that's
going to affect the way my brain ages,
you know, for the subsequent decades of
my life?" And there are other things
that can also be done that don't even
require as much effort as exercise.
Exercise is the gold standard because I
mean, being able to not only, you know,
stave off atrophy of the of the brain,
but to like regrow some of it is
incredible, right? I mean, that's just
mind-blowing. Have they ever taken
people with dementia, Alzheimer's, and
put them on an exercise program and
monitored the decline of their cognitive
abilities on an exercise program?
>> Yes. I mean, it's it's much harder when
you already have someone who
is in that pathological state because
things just really snowball and
accelerate. And there are some benefits.
I mean,
>> but it's not it's not prevention is
always the best. Prevention is always
the best. And so, you know, I I think
that if there's any sort of take-home
here, it's that like let's let's try to
do what we can now so that we don't get
to that point
>> before we get into the the the easier
ways of staving off cognitive decline.
Do do we know what causes dementia and
Alzheimer's yet? Do do we have any
ideas? Because we can when they do the
brain imaging, they can kind of see
these plaques on the brain, they say.
that
>> I mean there's a lot of different it's
multiffactorial which means there's a
lot of different causes of dementia and
Alzheimer's disease so I would say you
mentioned plaques amaloid beta plaques
what happens is you know that's the
aggregation of a protein in our brain
called amalloid that typically is
cleared from our brain and um what
happens is this abnormal
you know thing happens where you're not
clearing the amaloid and so it starts to
kind of form these clumps and aggregates
with the amaloid proteins that are not
being cleared. And that essentially is
happening outside of your neurons, but
it's happening where the synapses are
formed between neurons. And so what
happens is it kind of disrupts the
synaptic connection between neurons,
which is essentially forming a memory.
And so when you start to disrupt that
connection, you lose not only the the
memories start to go away, but the whole
purpose of the neuron is to kind of I
mean one of the purposes is to to form a
memory. And so you start to like neurons
start to die, right? When they start to
lose their purpose. Amaloid aggregation
is linked to a lot of things. So, for
example, I mentioned it being cleared
when we sleep, particularly when we're
in our deep sleep stage, slowwave sleep.
That is um something happens that's kind
of incredible. It's called activation of
the glimpmphatic system. So, you've
heard of the lymphatic system. Well, the
glimpmphatic system is essentially this
series of like networks and like almost
like these like highways and essentially
roads and stuff all like throughout the
brain where you're squirting this
cerebral spinal fluid throughout the
brain and it's clearing away all the
garbage things like proteins that didn't
get cleared and it's sort of squirting
them out and clearing them out through
this lymphatic system. that lymphatic
system is activated during sleep and
it's one of the reasons why people that
don't get good sleep over the course of
decades have a higher risk of
Alzheimer's disease is because they're
getting these amaloid plaques built up
in their brains but there's other causes
as well so for example glucose
metabolism is disrupted in the brains of
Alzheimer's disease you need glucose
your neurons need glucose and so you
know the essentially um your your brain
isn't able to make energy correctly
without the glucose getting into your
brain. And so that's another sort of
metabolic underlying cause of
Alzheimer's disease where you're
essentially I mean it's thought to be
where you're eating a lot of refined
carbohydrates, refined sugars and you're
not exercising and essentially you're
you're disrupting the glucose metabolism
in the brain as well as the whole body.
Right? So the brain and body are
connected but um there's also genetic
causes as well and you know some people
have genes that can increase the risk of
Alzheimer's disease because they're not
able to clear amaloid as well because
they're not able to repair damage as
well. So the the bloodb brain barrier
which is really important for filtering
out toxic things from getting into the
brain
it starts to break down and that's one
of the I would say early early signs of
Alzheimer's disease is that breakdown of
the bloodb brain barrier and that
happens in people that have a genetic
risk factor called APOE4. You may have
heard of this but this is probably one
of the biggest
genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's
disease. About 25% of the population has
one copy of this gene. That increases
the risk of Alzheimer's disease by
twofold. If you have two copies of it,
it increases the risk of Alzheimer's
disease by tenfold.
>> So twofold being 200%.
>> Twofold being twice twice as much. Yeah.
200%. And 10fold being a,000%. Right.
You're you're you're basically I mean
it's it's pretty bad. And it's not like
a
it's not your destiny to get the
Alzheimer's disease if you have those
genes. You can do things in your
lifestyle that can sort of turn the
table. So you're not you're not
necessarily going to be getting that
that Alzheimer's disease and a lot of
different lifestyle factors like getting
good sleep, like exercising, avoiding
alcohol, avoiding smoking, not being
overweight and obese. Like those affect
your Alzheimer's disease risk.
More importantly, if you have one of
those genes, then you really have to be
cognizant of those things because if you
have one of those, you know, ApoE4
genes, then then essentially your
lifestyle matters even more than people
that don't.
>> And you can do a test to figure out if
you have those genes.
>> Yes. Yes. There's a a variety of genetic
testing services that can be done.
pretty much all the ones that are out
there on on the market, you know,
ancestry DNA. I mean, depending on where
you live and what there's so many out
there right now that that will test for
that.
>> Mortified if I found out I had two of
those genes.
>> Two of them is less common. When I
mentioned the 25% of the population
having it, it's usually one alil.
Alcohol essentially can really increase
the risk of Alzheimer's disease if you
have one of those genes. And I think
that there's really no safe amount of
alcohol that can be consumed for people
that have APOE4. if you're concerned
about dementia and Alzheimer's disease.
The other thing is contact sports and
traumatic brain injury. people that have
any of the, you know, any one or two of
the APOE4 genes, if they have that, then
if they get a TBI, like if they're
playing American football or they're
playing soccer or MMA or boxing,
whatever,
>> then you talk about like going up to a
10-fold risk for Alzheimer's disease
when you get like an injury because
people with those genes don't repair
damage as well.
>> So, it affects their their brain's
ability to repair damage. And so that's
also really important to consider.
>> So moving back then to this the simple
things that we can do to improve our
cognitive performance as we age, the
things that are simpler than doing the
vigorous hit training.
>> There's actually quite a few. And first
and foremost, the one I love the most is
a simple multivitamin.
And the reason I love this is because
I don't know it was about 10 years ago
there was a a huge study that was
published and it was published in the
Annals of Internal Medicine and it was
called Enough is Enough. Multivitamins
are not only useless, they're harmful
and it was essentially looking at a
variety of studies and arguing that
multivitamins are expensive urine.
You're just not really doing anything.
And in fact, if you take a multivitamin,
you might even be increasing the risk of
disease.
That study was terrible. And I 10 years
ago went and just broke it down and, you
know, pulled it apart piece by piece.
But here we are 10 years later. Three
large clinical trials have been done.
And these are randomized control trials
where older adults were given either a
multivitamin and this was just your
standard run-of-the-mill multivitamin
Centrum silver or they were given a
placebo and they were given this for a
couple of years.
And what three different studies showed
was that a multivitamin improved
cognition, improved processing speed, it
improved what's called episodic memory.
So the kind of memory where you're
remembering experiences and you can
recall events, things like that. And not
only did it improve it, it improved it
so much that it was equivalent to
reducing the aging of the episodic
memory by 5 years. So a simple
multivitamin and why is that important?
Because you know multivitamins have a
variety of these vitamins and minerals
that we're not getting from our diet
that are important for everything. for
metabolism, for the way our
neurotransmitters are firing, for
reducing damage that's causing, you
know, oxidative stress, right? So, a
simple multivitamin, how much easier can
it be than taking a simple multivitamin?
And the fact of the matter is that we're
talking about a randomized control
trial. This is showing cause, right?
This isn't just an association. This is
showing that you took a multivitamin for
a couple of years and improved your
cognition more than a placebo. So, I
think that's pretty incredible and it's
one of the examples that I like.
But, um, diving deeper into some of the
the nutrients, this is this is an area,
you know, I started out as a scientist.
I started out as a chemist actually. But
when I first got into biology,
I was working in an aging lab and
studying aging. It was very interesting
to me because I essentially with my own
experiments with my own two hands could
could manipulate these like tiny little
worms. They're called sea elegance and
their whole genome was sequenced at the
time and this was like in the early
2000s and um they have a lot of genes
that are similar to humans. It's called
homology and one of the genes is the
insulin signaling pathway and the IGF-1
pathway. So insulin signaling would be
something that's activated with glucose.
You're eating a lot of sugar, right? And
I could take these worms and I could
genetically decrease their insulin
signaling. So it kind of, if you think
about a parallel to that, that would be,
okay, we're not going to be eating as
much sugar, right? We're not going to be
activating that pathway so much. Mhm.
>> And I could do that in this worm that
has a life expectancy of about 15 days
and I could extend its life expectancy
to 30 days, right? So you're increasing
its life expectancy by pretty much, you
know, 100%. Right? Well, not only did
they, you know, live longer, they were
healthier and youthful, and you could
see that visually, they're moving around
and they were just youthful worms. And
so I was very excited about this, you
know, in my 20s because I was like,
"Wow, this is very relevant. We have
this gene and we know lifestyle factors
that affect it, right? Sugar." So the
takehome for me was
lifestyle matters, you know? Yeah,
genetics, maybe that'll be something one
day where we're decreasing the insulin
signal. But I was looking for the now,
not the future technology. And so the
now to me was wow, like I don't want to
be constantly activating my, you know,
insulin signaling pathway. like look
what happens to these worms if you
reduce it. I mean it's amazing. They're
youthful and they live longer. And so I
started to kind of get into diet and
lifestyle sort of just out of curiosity
and sort of reading in the literature
and I came across some studies from my
mentor Dr. Bruce Ames where he was
showing that not getting enough
nutrients like for example folate.
Folate is found in dark leafy greens
like kale. You know, folate if you if
you if you decrease folate and make
someone deficient in it, it essentially
causes doublestranded breaks in your DNA
that essentially is like being under
ionizing radiation. And that experiment
was done like you could take a mouse
make it like put low folate in the in
you know the mouse's food and then take
another mouse and put it under an
ionizing radiation machine and the
amount of double stranded breaks in
their DNA which cause cancer which
accelerate aging which affect every
every you know how how your your cells
are functioning it was the same. So, it
was like, wow.
Not having a certain nutrient in your
diet was like standing under a radiating
machine, ionizing radiation. No one's
going to want to stand under an ionizing
radiation machine, but no one's thinking
about how your diet can do the same
thing. Um, and that was kind of I got
into a lot of Bruce's Bruce's research
at the time. So, Bruce,
he anyone in the in the science field
knows Dr. Bruce Ames. actually came up
with the Ames carcinogen test and that
essentially was a way of cheaply looking
at and identifying whether something's a
carcinogen and he got into sort of
nutrition as he started to figure things
like folate basically being lack of
folate being a carcinogen essentially
right like ionizing radiation is a
carcinogen
and then he started to go on to other
nutrients as well like magnesium and B
vitamins but I think for me the aha
moment was
micronutrients and these vitamins and
minerals are affecting the way we age,
are affecting our health on a similar
level as these toxic things that we're
worried about like ionizing radiation.
>> And nobody's thinking about it like
that.
>> So, I'll give you an example. Vitamin D,
you talked about dementia, what's going
to help prevent dementia. Vitamin D is,
it's actually more than a vitamin.
Vitamin D gets converted into a steroid
hormone. So, a steroid hormone
essentially what it does is it goes into
the nucleus of a cell where all your DNA
is and it it's activating genes and
deactivating them. It's affecting your
genome and it's actually over 5% of your
your your genome is being affected by
vitamin D. Why is that important?
Because
70% of the US population has
insufficient levels of vitamin D. The
reason for that is because vitamin D3 is
actually made in the skin from UVB
radiation from the sun. And so if you're
not outside, then you're not really
making a lot of vitamin D3 in your skin.
And vitamin D3 then gets converted into
this steroid hormone that regulates
everything, right? And so um you know
modern day society, you know, we're
inside all the time. We're working.
We're not outside. And even if you were
outside, there's so many other factors
that affect it. So, anything that blocks
out UVB radiation blocks out the
availability of your body to make
vitamin D3. So, sunscreen, right? That's
a big one. Melanin, the the darker
pigmentation that acts as a natural
sunscreen. And then latitude, depending
on where you live, also. So, you know, a
good number of months out of the year,
if you're in a more northern latitude
like England, like Wales, like Chicago
or Sweden, you're not UVB radiation is
not even hitting the atmosphere, you
know, for several months out of the
year. Combine that with sunscreen or
melanin, and you got like this disaster,
right? In fact, there was a study out of
the University of Chicago that looked at
African-Americans and Caucasians
and their ability white people.
>> Yeah, exactly. Their ability to make
vitamin D3 from UVB radiation
>> from the sun. Yeah.
>> And as I mentioned, you know, melanin is
a natural sunscreen. And you know,
people that are, you know, either, you
know, from African origin or South
American or Southeast Asian, right?
People that are closer to the equator
usually have more melanin. It's an it's
an adaptation to prevent you from
burning from the UV rays of the sun.
Well, um, this University of Chicago
study found that, um, you know, people
that are African-American had to stay in
the sun six to 10 times longer than
people with fair skin, the Caucasians,
to make the same amount of vitamin D3.
And so, as a consequence, if you take
someone who like yourself, well, you're
you're you got a little bit more mel
melanin mixed
>> a little bit. Yeah, you've got a little
bit more melanin. But let's say you take
someone who, you know, has a
>> like my mom, she's Nigerian.
>> Okay. Your mom from Yeah. Nigerian. And
let's say your mom moves to Chicago,
>> right?
>> Well, she's moved to bloody England.
>> Or she moved to England, right? Exactly.
Then you're talking about a recipe for
disaster in terms of vitamin D because
you're not only not making it several
months out of the year, I forgot how
many months out of the year, maybe four
or five or something like that where the
UVB radiation is not even hitting the
atmosphere, but you have this natural
sunscreen. What's the consequences of
that in terms of symptoms?
>> Well, it's it's kind it's not like an
acute thing where you kind of just look
in the mirror and you're like,
>> what is the causation then in terms of
>> Right. Right. Yeah. So, the reason I say
this is because people always think of
like, well, I'm not getting enough
vitamin C and I have scurvy and you can
look in the mirror and your gums are
falling apart. Right. It's easy to
identify this. Vitamin D deficiency or
insufficiency is more insidious. It's
kind of this damage that accumulates
over time. it's something that isn't,
you know, quite noticeable or maybe
maybe you're feeling, you know, m maybe
you're feeling like lethargic or you
don't have enough energy, things like
that, but you don't really really know
quite why. So, vitamin D insufficiency
and deficiency, there are acute effects
where like if it's severe, it can cause
ricketetts and like bone mal forations
and stuff, especially if it's happening
early in life. But um what we now know
is that being
deficient or insufficient in vitamin D
can increase dementia risk by 80%. And
that's been shown in multiple studies.
The converse is also true. So people
that supplement with vitamin D3, and
this is where a simple solution comes
in, right? So you're not making it from
your skin, but you can take a
supplement. People that supplement with
vitamin D3 have a 40% reduced risk of
dementia. So in other words, they're
avoiding deficiency, which is very
common, and avoiding that deficiency
then is reducing their dementia risk.
And there's actually even been studies
in people with dementia, in people with
Alzheimer's disease that were giving a
vitamin D supplement or a placebo
control. And those individuals given the
vitamin D supplement had improved
cognition. They had um lower markers of
amaloid plaques. So those were this will
those were also measured as well. So
vitamin D is doing a lot of things. It's
it's regulating 5% of your protein
encoding human genome.
>> If I want to increase my probability of
getting dementia, then I've got to stay
out of the sun. I've got to avoid um
vitamin D. I've got to drink alcohol,
smoke, be sedentary, and I've got to
sleep really badly.
>> Yes. And eat a lot of refined sugar.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes. Yes. Exactly. Okay.
>> Exactly. Now, you might go, "Well, how
much vitamin D?" Right? I'm talking
about deficiency and insufficiency and
you really want to get a blood test to
know what your levels are. There have
been I don't know 30 plus studies that
have looked at vitamin D levels and all
cause mortality. So that would be again
you know how you know dying from a
variety of different diseases
cardiovascular disease respiratory
disease cancer and people that have
blood levels of vitamin D between 40 60
maybe 80 nanogs per milliliter have the
lowest all-c cause mortality so these
people are not deficient not
insufficient insufficiency happens at
about 30 nanogs per milliliter below
that deficiency is 20 nanogs per mill
milliliter and below and so um there
have been a variety of studies that have
looked at for example the brain and the
aging brain and vitamin D levels and
it's been shown that for every you know
10 nanimal per liter decrease in vitamin
D blood levels there's an increase in
brain damage it's called white matter
hyperintensities it's basically damage
to the white matter in your brain and
the white matter in your brain is myelin
that's how your brain's communicating
and and like how you know it electrical
impulses are being you know moved so
that you can think and talk and all
that. Exactly.
>> Yeah. I hadn't had one today, so I feel
like you you've persuaded me.
>> Most people that are deficient can
increase their blood levels to a normal
sufficient level by about 4,000 IUs of
vitamin D per day. So, not and that's
been done that's been shown in multiple
studies. Not it's not it's not that hard
to take. In fact, vitamin D supplements
are probably the cheapest supplement out
there. It's like 10 cents per pill. When
you talked about these,
>> I was really surprised to hear that they
have cancer preventing chemicals in
them. And then um I was looking at some
of the research and it does say exactly
as you said, things like kale, broccoli,
Brussels sprouts linked to a reduction
in breast cancerous prostate, lung, and
colarctyl cancers. According to the
World Cancer Research Fund and PubMed,
most of us don't eat enough of this
stuff cuz it's not the tastiest stuff.
And you talked about sugar as well. It
it makes me think about the diet that
I'm currently on, which is the ketogenic
diet, and whether that is an optimal
diet in terms of all of the things we've
discussed earlier, dementia, longevity,
aging. What is your views on the
ketogenic diet? I think there's there's
the extreme ketogenic diet, like the
classical ketogenic diet, and then
there's modified sort of low carb
ketogenic diets that do allow for I
mean, there's yes, these are leafy
greens that are carbohydrate, but
they're high in fiber and they're low
glycemic index. And so, you can actually
eat leafy greens on a ketogenic diet and
still be in ketosis. So I the ketogenic
diet is very I'm very interested in it
because I do think that beta
hydroxybutyrate which is the ke major
circulating ketone body that's produced
when you're in ketosis is highly
beneficial much like lactate it can
actually do a lot of what lactate can
do. It gets into the brain and it's an e
easily utilizable source of energy by
neurons. These are ketones, which is
what your body makes when you
>> abstain from carbohydrates and sugars.
Yes. It eventually shifts into ketosis
where you're running on keto.
>> You're in ketosis and you're running on
ketones.
>> Yes. It's what you're measuring when
you're doing your when you're measuring
your finger prick that it's beta
hydroxybutyrate. That's the major
circulating one
>> that you're measuring. And that's
actually a signaling molecule. It's
activating brain drive neurotrphic
factor in the brain. And so it's very
interesting because it's it's almost
like having lactate in your body but
having it constantly. So I'm super
interested in a ketogenic diet
particularly for people that respond
well. I mean some people their
triglycerides go really high, their
cholesterol goes really high and there's
sort of an I would say individual
variation in terms of how you respond.
And so it's good to always measure
everything right to make sure that
you're responding well to ketogenic diet
or to maybe cycle it. I've been very
interested in cycling it for brain
benefits as well because of the beta
hydroxybutyrate where it's it's just so
beneficial for the brain. You know, it's
been shown that you know beta
hydroxybutyrate. So what happens is when
you have this ketone like beta
hydroxybutyrate get into the brain, it's
able to be used as energy instead of
glucose. I feel like we should take a
step back and explain what keto is for
for the for the listener who maybe has
never really heard or understood it
before. And I know that there's a large
proportion of people that don't know
what it what it is because I spend a lot
of time at dinner parties trying to talk
about it. And it's super surprising to
me that the average person actually
doesn't really know what what keto or
ketosis is.
>> So, I think that's great. Yeah, we can
talk about ketosis. Um, essentially if
we if we kind of take a a thousand mile
high view of it without getting so
technical,
>> yeah,
>> I would say the best way to think about
being in ketosis is your body is using
fatty acids as energy and not much
glucose. You'll still use a little bit
of glucose. You need to use glucose
because your red blood cells, for
example, don't have any mitochondria.
They need glucose, but you're mostly
using fatty acids as energy that are
being produced from they're being
released from fat stored in atapost
tissue,
>> which is like my belly,
>> which is like your belly, visceral fat,
um, subcutaneous fat.
>> So, this sounds great. My body's going
to use burn the fat instead of burn, you
know, burning glucose, which I've got
from eating bread or something. So, I'm
going to get skinny.
>> People do lose weight on a ketogenic
diet.
>> My dad has lost so much weight, it's
ridiculous. It's like shocking. on a
ketogenic diet.
>> Yeah, it's crazy. He was quite a big man
if I say so myself. Very big belly. And
he sent me this screenshot the other day
after a couple of months on the
ketogenic diet.
>> And he's like 13. He's just for the
first time ever been 13 stone since
since he was in his teens. He's now 13
stone. So he's lost what the equivalent
of about four four or five stone in
weight in a couple of months. And he
just looks completely different. Now,
I'm not, you know, I'm not necessarily
saying to stay on that diet forever, but
the the speed in which one can lose
weight on a ketogenic diet is
remarkable,
>> right? And so, you're you're basically
the food that you're eating is
predominantly
fat, right? So, you're you're basically
not only using the fat that your body
already has stored, but you're also
fueling yourself. You're feeding
yourself more fat, right? So, you're
basically using the fat as energy and
through a whole bunch of biochemical
reactions, you produce ketone bodies as
a byproduct of of that. It doesn't
necessarily have to be just ketogenic
diet. Like, you can when you're fasting,
you go into ketosis, right? Because if
you think about it, you're you're not
giving yourself food. Instead, you're
relying on what your body already has as
a source of energy. And you only have so
much glucose stored as glycogen right in
your liver. And that I would say after
there's individual variation, but after
about 12 hours of not giving your body
food, you sort of deplete all your
glycogen stores and then so you start to
shift to lipolysis, which means the
breakdown of fat. So fasting is another
way to go to get into ketosis. Another
way would be intense exercise. So, like,
you know, these endurance athletes that
are doing long duration types of
exercise also can go into ketosis,
right? Because they're depleting their
glycogen stores much quicker and they're
also using all this energy that they've
they've fueled themselves with because
it's it's so intense, right? Long
duration type of exercise. And so, and
you can combine these things as well,
right? You can do endurance exercise
with the ketogenic diet and you really
kind of can get into ketosis quicker. Is
it like a switch?
>> So there is something called metabolic
flexibility which essentially means that
your body is able to
switch between burning glucose and using
glucose as energy but also using fatty
acids as making you know as energy and
then producing ketones as well. And the
more I would say the more um if you've
done ketosis or if you exercise a lot
like frequently or you do any form of
fasting or what's called timerestricted
eating. So let's say you eat all your
food within an eight hour window and
then for 16 hours you're not eating
food. Your body is used to switching to
fatty acid metabolism to to using fatty
acids as energy. So you're really
metabolically flexible. And um not
everyone's able to do that because most
people actually they think they eat
within a 12-h hour period, but they
there's been studies that have been done
that have shown that actually they eat
more like within a 15 to 16 hour period,
not not even a 12-h hour period.
Certainly not a 10 or eight hour period.
So there's, as I mentioned, it takes
about 12 hours on average to deplete all
your glycogen levels. Now, you can
accelerate that, if you're doing a lot
of physical activity, but once you
deplete that liver glycogen, that is
when you shift into burning fatty acids
and then eventually ketosis, right?
>> In terms of longevity, have they ever
done any studies where they've put
someone on the ketogenic diet or like a
mouse or a rat on a ketogenic diet
versus the the average diet and then
monitored how long they live?
>> There have been studies by uh Dr. Eric
Verden out of the uh Buck Institute for
Aging in Novado, California. And I mean
this was several years ago. He's done
these studies probably almost 10 years
ago, maybe about 2018 or 2017 these
studies were published. But um he he did
do some of these studies with a
ketogenic diet in rodents and it did
seem to extend life expectancy but more
importantly the health span. So
particularly in the brain. So it's like
their brain had aged much much better.
they had less of the all of the
pathological features of Alzheimer's
disease. And again, I do think like I
mentioned, I I'm I'm super interested in
beta hydroxybutyrate
in particular. I mean, there's it's
multiffactorial because on the one hand,
you're not eating as much glucose,
right? And that in in and of itself is
important because glucose can be so
damaging particularly if you're not
physically active because it's not if
you if you're physically active and
you're eating some amount of glucose
that's going into your muscle.
>> It's not damaging the vascular system.
>> The vas the cardio the vascular system
is very much related to the brain,
right? So when you start to stiffen your
blood vessels and stiffen everything, I
mean that's that's affecting blood flow
to the brain. It's you know it's causing
hypertension. That all affects brain
aging as well. So, I think just, you
know, and then the the the damage that
the glucose does in and of itself, like
I mean there's studies, it's really
interesting. There's studies showing
that people even on the high end of
normal in terms of their blood glucose
levels. So, they're normal, but they're
kind of on the high end of normal. They
had more brain atrophy than people on
the low end of normal.
>> By brain atrophy, you mean their brain
was
>> shrinking.
>> Shrinking.
>> Shrinking. And it was the hippocampus,
by the way. again that
>> that part of the brain that's involved
in learning and memory. So the glucose
itself has this effect on you causing
damage and accelerating the aging
process. But then there's this other
very interesting effect of these
chemicals that are made as a byproduct
of being in ketosis and that is the beta
hydroxybutyrate that ketone body gets
into the brain. It's transported across
the brain through an MCT transporter.
And when it gets into the brain, it can
be used as energy. And you your neurons
don't need to use glucose. And it can do
that. So your your neurons can use
glucose as energy, but it takes energy
to use that glucose to make energy. When
you use the ketone, the beta
hydroxybutyrate, it takes less energy to
you to make that energy. So it's
energetically favorable to actually use
that ketone, that beta hydroxybutyrate.
On top of that, this is what's so
interesting, it frees up glucose. So,
the neurons aren't using the glucose.
Where does the glucose go? Right?
Because it's there. It's it it sort of
shunts it into this other pathway that's
called the pentos phosphate pathway. I
don't want to, you know, burden people
with all the technical details, but
let's get to the important part of that
is that it shunts glucose into this
pathway that makes essentially its
precursors that make what's called
glutathione, the major antioxidant in
the brain. And so you're making more
glutathione day after day after day.
That is huge because oxidation in the
brain, inflammation, this is a huge
cause of brain aging and Alzheimer's
disease, dementia. We now know
neuroinflammation is one of the major
causes of it. And so if you have more
glutathione in your brain, you are going
to basically sequester that damage
that's causing, you know, that's that's
aging the brain essentially. And so the
glucose now is not being used for
energy. It's being used to make an
antioxidant in the brain. Okay, that's
also
really cool. And there's more. There's
more. Okay, so then the beta
hydroxybutyrate itself is a signaling
molecule like lactate.
>> The ketone,
>> the ketone itself is a signaling
molecule where it's basically, you know,
it's a little bit of a stressed state,
right? So when you're in ketosis, it's
you're stressing the body. It's either
exercise or you're fasting or you're on
this ketogenic diet. And so your body
again is responding to that stress by
making like a bunch of awesome resilient
stress response things that are
basically gonna improve the way you age.
And so the ketone beta hydroxybutyrate
then activates brain drive neurotrphic
factor. This miracle growth for your
brain, right? It's involved in growing
new neurons. It's involved in increasing
the connection between neurons. It's
involved in neuroplasticity. All those
things. And so you get this multi-level
benefit not getting not having the glue
glucose causing the damage. You have um
basically the glucose now being used.
Not only is it not going causing damage,
it's being used to make an antioxidant.
And then you have the whole ketone, you
know, aspect where you're you're
essentially um making and activating all
these beneficial pathways in the brain
that reduces aging. And what's going on
when we take
exogenous ketones, external ketones via
a drink or something like that?
>> Yeah. So, what's happening is you're
essentially giving your body the beta
hydroxybutyrate ketone that it would
make normally if you were undergoing
ketosis and using fatty acids only as
energy. You're giving your body a big
boost of it. So, you're kind of
bypassing the the way that your body
would make it itself and giving it to
your body. And it's great for people
that
have a hard time with doing a ketogenic
diet, for example. Maybe they just can't
stick with it or maybe they don't
respond very well to it in terms of
other biomarkers. They're going to get a
lot of the benefit, but it's only going
to last, you know, one to three hours,
right?
>> Yeah. Until it flushes out, right?
>> Until until you use it up. Yeah. And so
it's in addition to just people that
want to get that focus and attention,
which is what both you and I have
experienced when we've taken these, you
know, supplements, this exogenous
ketone.
There's also some potential therapeutic
effects. So people that have mild
cognitive decline, maybe like the first
stages of dementia or Alzheimer's
disease can kind of perk up and um
perform better when they have when
they're given an exogenous ketone, this
supplemental ketone beta
hydroxybutyrate. There's not a lot of
studies on it, but there's like a few
case studies where
>> case studies being like a single person
is given it and they're followed and
looked at, you know,
>> and it's very interesting.
>> I actually know that they're doing
studies on exactly that at the moment.
Um because I've spoken to a few of these
companies and a few scientists that are
in this field over the last couple of
over the last couple of weeks in fact
and they were saying that we're
currently in the process of doing
studies to see that if exogenous ketones
which are these ketone drinks or ketone
shots can repair your cognitive faculty
faculties and is that via the process
that you describe where glucose is
pushed into this other pathway?
>> Yes. So, um, I think I'm aware of the
same study because I've I've looked it
up in the clinical trial and what's
what's being looked at after giving this
exogenous beta hydroxybutyrate, this
supplemental ketone in people with
Alzheimer's disease, you can repair
damage because again you are activating
brain drive neurotrphic factor which can
it can repair damage. It can grow new
neurons. It can help with brain atrophy.
it can strengthen connection between
neurons and then the glucose now is
being shunted into that repair pathway
that glutathione is being activated and
and that's able to you know repair
damage as well. So I I'm excited to see
the public like that that study
published.
>> I would hypothesize that there's going
to be beneficial effects and it's going
to be pretty exciting particularly
because it is hard for older adults some
older adults to do a ketogenic diet.
It's not the easiest thing to follow. I
mean, you do have to be pretty
disciplined.
So, this alternative to being able to
supplement with something that can sort
of at least for the course of a couple
of hours do what being on a ketogenic
diet can do is very exciting. Right.
>> When you took the keto shot that you had
at home, what did you experience? You
said it was potent. It was powerful.
>> Yeah. It was like a neutropic effect
where when I mean neutropic effect, it's
it's the kind of effect where you you
feel
focused, your attention, your alertness
is enhanced, you're sort of filtering
out all the background noise in your
brain that sort of those little thoughts
that pop in and distract you. And so,
uh, you're more productive. And, um,
that was very noticeable. In fact, there
was a time when I was like before any
podcast, I would take a shot of it. I
would do it and um it's kind kind of
expensive, but it is I there's a lot of
people that are that are using it now.
And I think it's I think it's a better
alternative to some other neutropics
that are common right now, like
nicotine, for example, which can really
have a negative trade-off, but can do
something similar. Whereas this is like
not only gives you that sort of
cognitive enhancement, that brain pump,
it also has like benefits for brain
aging. Right.
>> What are your superfoods? There must be
foods of yours. Um olive oil has become
one of my superfoods. Just a food that I
love to just put on as many things as I
can because everybody tells me about
these polyphenols which are apparently
amazing for you. But what are some of
the your sort of favorite superfoods
that you try and consume that most
people might not think of? So we talked
about leafy greens. I guess that's one
of them.
>> It is leafy greens. Um they have they're
high in magnesium and you know magnesium
is at the center of a chlorophyll
molecule. Chlorophyll give plants their
green color. Magnesium is very important
for preventing damage to DNA DNA and
cancer. And you know half half the US
population doesn't get enough of it.
They're high in a lot of different
compounds. I mean they're folate,
vitamin K one. So you're getting a lot
of these micronutrients that are
important. So I do like re dark leafy
greens. I particularly like kale and
broccoli because of something called
sulfurophane
which is sulurophane itself is not in
them but a precursor when you break the
plant or you chew it um it makes
sulfurophane. So there's an enzyme that
gets activated that converts a precursor
in these plants called glucaraphin into
sulurophane. Sulfurophane is also
increases glutathione in the brain. It
helps detoxify pollutants like benzene,
um, bisphenol A, BPA as well. So, I do
like dark leafy greens of the
cruciferous family of vegetables. Again,
that would be kale, broccoli. Um, those
are those are the cruciferous family.
>> I also like blueberries. Blueberries are
a source of polyphenols. You mentioned
olive oil as a polyphenol. If you're on
a ketogenic diet, olive oil is like the
great, right? Because you need fat. And
olive oil is so great because it also
has those polyphenols that are
beneficial. has been shown even in
studies to improve cognition and memory
and uh lower even marker markers of um
bad cardiovascular disease like Apo B
for example lower that. So blueberries I
like because blueberries have also been
shown even a cup of blueberries a day
has been shown to improve cognition. So
I like the polyphenols. It increases
blood flow to the brain. I also like
salmon and I think that would be
something that most people would think
is healthy. I like it because it's high
in the omega-3 fatty acids which I'm
very very it's I think it's very very
important to get enough omega-3 fatty
acids. I also supplement with them
because there's a lot of research out
there and if you want to get into that
we can but um the superfood would be the
the salmon because it is a fatty source
of fish that is high in omega-3 fatty
acids EPA and DHA which are found in
marine sources not plant sources of
omega-3.
>> I found it really interesting when I was
looking at omega-3 that it has an impact
on mental health and depression and
things like that.
>> Yeah, it does. It's it's it resolves
inflammation. It's sort of an
anti-inflammatory
and inflammation plays a role in
depression. A big role. In fact, we we
know that um people that are injected
with inflammatory molecules like
something that's made in our gut from
the bacteria in our gut called
lipopolysaccharide.
If you inject them with that it or a
placebo control, which is saline, it
causes depression. But if you give them
an omega-3 fatty acid supplement, EPA,
it blunts the depressive symptoms. So,
in other words, if you're causing the
inflammation by injecting something that
causes inflammation in people, it causes
depression. But if you give those same
people something that blunts that
inflammation, omega-3 fatty acids, it
doesn't cause the depression, which is
kind of amazing. And there's a ton of
other evidence out there. But, um,
omega-3 fatty acids are
they're so important. And what's
interesting was there's a study out of
Harvard that identified the marine
source. So, I talked about salmon, EPA,
DHA, and then there's the plant source,
ALA. And I say marine source because
it's really those are the important ones
that you really want
>> from the ocean,
>> from fish, seafood. So, this Harvard
study identified not eating enough
seafood as one of the top six
preventable causes of death up there
with not having hypertension, not
smoking. So essentially not getting
enough omega-3 from seafood was so
important for preventing early death
that it was comparable to people having
high blood pressure, having
cardiovascular disease, for example. And
again, it's one of those things where
people just don't think about what
they're not eating, what they're not
getting. And um you there's so much
research that have been done even since
that that study that was published in
like 2009 looking at omega-3 fatty acid
levels in our blood cells, red blood
cells. This is called the omega-3 index.
O it's really an important marker of our
long-term omega-3 because our our red
blood cells stay around in our system
for like 120 days. So it's a long-term
marker of your omega-3 intake. And
there's been a variety of studies um
done from Dr. Bill Harris out of the
fatty acid research institute. So I'm an
associate a scientist there showing that
people with what's called a high omega-3
index
>> which is a lot of omega-3
>> a lot of omega-3 their omega-3 index
would be 8% or higher that's considered
high compared to a low omega-3 index.
That would be 4% or lower. The average
omega-3 index in the United States is
about 5%. So, it's on the low low range.
People that had the high omega-3 index,
in other words, they were either eating
a lot of fish like salmon and or
supplementing with fish oil or
microalgae oil, which is another a
marine source of these omega-3 fatty
acids. They had a five-year increased
life expectancy compared to people with
a low omega-3 index. Pretty big
difference there. All all you have to do
is essentially either eat enough seafood
and or supplement with a fish oil
supplement. But what was so fascinating
about this study was that Bill and his
colleagues not only looked at the
omega-3 index, they looked at people
that also smoked and they said, "Okay,
we know smoking is terrible for your
heart. We know it's causes early
mortality, cancer, and all that, right?
What about people that smoke and their
omega-3 index? So, there was four groups
that were looked at. Smokers that have
either a high omega-3 index, so these
smokers were either supplementing or
they were eating a lot of seafood. And
then there were smokers with a low
omega-3 index. And they compared them to
non-smokers with a high omega-3 index
versus a low omega-3 index. And what was
so fascinating about this study was that
smoking was like as bad for you in terms
of mortality as having a low omega-3
index. So the smokers with a high
omega-3 index had the same mortality
risk as non-smokers with a low omega-3
index, which is fascinating because
everybody knows to avoid smoking.
Smoking, if you want to take years off
your life, if you want to decrease the
quality of your life, start smoking
right now.
But the same mortality risk was found in
non-smokers who did not have a high
omega-3 index. Right now, I say this,
I'll talk about this and smokers will
say, "Oh, great. Now all I have to do is
take fish oil and I'll have the same
life expectancy as a non-smoker with,
you know, a low omega-3 index." But of
course, the the take-home here is that
for those of us that are not smoking,
but we're not getting enough omega-3
from our diet, that's like smoking in
terms of mortality risk. So, super
important, and I like talking about this
because it really makes it again really
clear that not getting these essential
nutrients can be very detrimental to our
health. And it's easy to fix. You can
take a fish oil supplement. You can
increase the amount of salmon that
you're eating. And there have been
studies from Bill's group that have
shown people that supplement with
between 1 to two grams of fish oil per
day can go from a low omega-3 index to a
high omega-3 index, which is not hard to
do.
>> So, I guess two questions, which is, is
having these little omega capsules the
same as eating the salmon in terms of
the omega3 that I'm getting? And how
long do I have to take these little
omega capsules for to move from having a
low index to a high omega-3 index?
>> Well, these are great questions,
Stephen. So, essentially, this little
capsule here is not the same as eating
salmon. And there's a few reasons why.
So, for one, when you're eating a fish
that's high in omega-3, like salmon,
you have this omega-3 in what's called
triglyceride form. So the omega-3 is is
is bound to a glycerol backbone and
that's really important for the way you
absorb it. Some fish oil supplements
don't have that. They're they're aster
they're basically they're molecular
distilled and then they're put they have
an ethanol back backbone. So it's not
quite as bioavailable. But I think more
importantly is that these fish oil
supplements are
purified. So you're not getting mercury
or microplastics or things that are also
found in the whole fish.
>> So these are better.
>> Unfortunately, I think so. I do. Um, as
much as I think it's it's better, you
know, for the longest time I always I
was always a whole foods first approach.
Um, but we do have this environmental
pollution problem and fish have been
contaminated with heavy metals. They've
been contaminated with microplastics.
I would say that salmon is one of the
lowest fish that has the lowest amount
of mercury compared to other fish. So it
on a on a per gram basis, you're getting
less mercury per gram with salmon than
you would be with, you know, something
like swordfish, for example. But but you
also have microplastics unfortunately
that are now in fish. And it is
something that enters our body when we
eat the fish. And so I do think the fish
oil supplements are a good alternative
because you're getting those omega-3
fatty acids and you're not you're you're
not getting some of the other bad things
that are in the fish.
>> That's fascinating. I didn't really I
didn't really think of omega-3 as being
that important, especially as it relates
to longevity. I always thought about it
as being something that would help my
brain work better today. You know,
cognitive performance now.
>> Well, it does that and it also helps
prevent the cognitive decline later. And
also cardiovascular disease, that's a
big one. So there have been some really
large randomized control trials that
have actually given people with
cardiovascular disease that are on, you
know, some sort of standard of care
treatment like a statin and they've
given them four grams a day of a
purified form of omega-3 called EPA
versus a placebo. And the people given
the omega-3
had 25% less cardiovascular related
death or events like heart attacks and
strokes. So, it's not only like
preventing, you know, we talked about
all cause mortality and this association
where you live longer. It's also helping
people that already have cardiovascular
disease and reducing their risk of dying
from it.
>> Right guys, going to go get Steve. The
guest is here. Ready?
>> Come in.
>> Oh my god. Steve,
>> what are you doing?
>> This is uh the Bontage face mask. It's
good for blemishes, wrinkles, uh clears
up the skin. It's red light. Have you
not used it before?
>> No. I tried this before. It's um it's
really really good. It's shines red
light on your face which helps increase
and boost collagen production. Actually
found it out cuz the misses seen her
wearing it. She terrified me a couple of
nights in a row. Um I thought it was to
scare people with but actually it's
really really good for your skin. So
they are a sponsor of the podcast and uh
I've been using it every day for about a
year and a half now.
>> Wow.
>> Well, Steve is great.
>> Yes. And Bon Charge ships worldwide with
easy returns and a year-long warranty on
all of their products. So, visit
bondcharge.com/diary
for 25% off on any product sitewide. But
you have to order through that link.
That's boncharge.com/diary
with code diary.
When I asked you before this
conversation started rolling, what
you're really excited about at the
moment, your response to me was there
was a few things, but one of them which
lit up your face was creatine.
>> Yes. And it's funny because
>> it lit up your face again.
>> Yeah. It's it's funny because creatine
has been around for I mean ever for
decades and it's always been in my mind
it was like one of those Jim bro things.
I'm like I don't need to be swole.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't need creatine get get swole. And
you know this is this was the thought
for for many many years. And then over
the last five years or so
the effects of creatine on the brain
started to really get my interest.
anything that affects the brain I really
become interested in. And so that's kind
of what did get me the most excited
about about creatine, but also I started
doing a lot of resistance training. And
so I was like, "Okay, here I am now. I'm
like one of those gym guys. I'm doing
I'm doing the barbells. I'm doing the,
you know, the squats and the deadlifts
and all that." And so so why not give
myself some of the creatine? Well, what
is creatine, right? Why is it important?
You talked about earlier, you know, why
doesn't our body just make more of these
things that are so beneficial? We do
make creatine. We make about, I don't
know, our liver makes about 1 to three
grams a day of creatine and our brain
also makes creatine and those are the
two organs that make it. Creatine gets
consumed by other tissues like the
muscle is probably the one that's the
greediest because creatine is stored as
phosphocreatine but it's used to make
energy essentially. So it can increase
muscle mass, it can increase muscle
strength in combination with resistance
training because you're able to
regenerate and make energy faster. So,
for example, I became interested in it
after reading studies where people that
supplemented with creatine that were
engaged in resistance training were able
to gain more lean body mass. They were
able to gain more strength. It was
increasing their training volume. So,
you can do one to two more reps, right,
of of whatever exercise you're doing.
And it seems to decrease the recovery
time between those those sets as well.
So, you're able to increase your
training volume. Well, anything that's
going to in increase your training
volume is going to then have the
downstream effect of, you know,
increasing the adaptations like
increased muscle mass or increased
muscle strength. I started supplementing
with creatine about a year ago and I
started supplementing with it for that
reason, for the my training and I was
doing about five grams a day because
that was really what was shown to to be
beneficial for muscle health in
combination with resistance training.
And it's important for people to realize
that supplementing with creatine by
itself, without any type of resistance
training, isn't going to grow your
muscle. It's not going to make you
stronger. You have to put in the effort
because what creatine is doing, it's
helping you make the energy quicker,
right? And that and then being able to
make that energy quicker means that
you're able to then do that exercise
better, um, harder, more of it, right?
So, um, it's sort of sup supercharging
your exercise routine.
and five grams a day was like, "Okay,
perfect. That's what I'm doing. I'm
doing five grams a day." And definitely
noticed an effect on my training volume
where I was, you know, doing more more
reps. So that was like, okay, a year
ago, I had already been aware of the
effects on the brain. I thought maybe
the five grams a day would do that. So
what are the effects on the brain? Well,
your brain also consumes a lot of
energy, you know, needs a lot of energy.
So it does make its own creatine. But it
turns out if you can if you can give
your brain more of that creatine
particularly under a period of anything
that's causing stress. So let's say lack
of sleep or let's say emotional
psychological stress or in my case high
cognitive load where you're just every
day learning concepts, complex things.
you're trying to remember them. You're
putting ideas together and coming up
with new hypotheses and you know, you're
just you're just you're studying a lot
and it's very cognitively demanding and
it's it's a type of stress on your
brain. That's like my life, right? Um
under this condition of stress,
depression is another one. That's a
stress on your brain or neurodeenerative
disease. That's a stress on your brain.
So any kind of stressful condition,
that's where creatine shines in the
brain. I would argue that I mean all of
us who who has the perfect amount of
sleep never has stress nobody right
there's always some sort of stress in
the background. So um that's when I was
like okay so if you're the perfect
person you have no stress you get the
perfect amount of sleep every night your
brain makes enough creatine to kind of
do what it needs to do. I know that I'm
constantly under stress. So um I'm like
okay well I think I need a boost. And
this is where a lot of very interesting
studies have come out of many different
labs. Um, some out of Germany that
looked at the dose of creatine and how
it increases creatine levels in the
brain. And this is why I now supplement
with 10 grams a day. So the study out of
Germany
found that five grams a day of creatine,
if you're supplementing with five grams
a day, your muscles are greedily
consuming it. Particularly if you're
working out, they want it. They want it.
after about five grams a day, especially
over a few months, like you're you're
saturating your muscle and that's
enough, right? Anything above that kind
of spills over to the brain. And so they
what this German study found was that 10
grams of creatine increased creatine
levels in several different regions of
the brain. And that was probably the
most exciting, you know, I would say
evidence that supplementing higher than
five grams a day was actually doing
something in terms of getting creatine
into the brain.
There have now been a variety of studies
that have looked at different outcomes,
right? So, if you supplement with 10
grams of creatine or even go higher than
that, like 20 grams of creatine, how
does that affect cognitive function,
right? And so, um some of these studies
have been been done by uh Dr. Darren
Kandow. He's um at the University of
Regina in Canada and it's looked they've
looked at things like sleep deprivation
and it's been found that if you take
someone and you sleep deprive them for
21 hours and give them about 25 to 30
grams of creatine, it completely negates
the cognitive deficits of sleep
deprivation. Actually, not only does it
negate the cognitive deficits of sleep
deprivation, it makes people function
better than if they were well-rested.
That's where I was like, wait a minute,
there's many times when I'm traveling,
I'm jet-lagged. Uh lots of times when
I'm sleep deprived and I have to be
doing a podcast or a presentation,
whatever. And in those situations, I go
up from my 10 grams to more like 20
grams. Like today for example, I wasn't
really sleepdeprived, but you know,
there was a lot of high cognitive
demand. This is a long podcast. There's
all that stuff. And so I went up to 20
grams today on my creatine. And I Well,
I will say even at the 10 grams for me,
we were talking about this with respect
to being in ketosis.
I don't feel that mid-afternoon crash
when I have the creatine. Not being on a
ketogenic diet, not being in ketosis.
It's very clear for me and I've done
this where sometimes I only do five
grams and then if I do that I'll notice
I'm like why am I tired right now? So
there's something interesting and maybe
it's placebo. I'm going to throw that
out there. Very possible. But I don't
know maybe the creatine is again it's
able to regenerate that energy quicker
and so that's also beneficial for the
brain. And now I I would say all these
creatine researchers a lot of them are
shifting to the brain. And it used to be
all muscle focused and now people are
super interested in what creatine is
doing to the brain, especially if you're
supplementing with more of it. And you
know, this is important for people that
are under a stressful situation, but
also for vegans because creatine is
found in food, mostly in animal products
like meat and poultry and fish, dairy. A
lot of vegans don't eat that. And I've
had so many of my vegan friends,
I've got them on the creatine, and it's
changed their lives. I mean, they're
like, "This is like incredible." You
know, can you imagine someone who's not
getting any creatine from their diet
because they eat no meat and all of a
sudden they start supplementing with 5,
10 grams of creatine and it's like they
have energy. Some people say they they
require less sleep, which is kind of
interesting. That's kind of a comment
I've heard many, many times from people
is that it's like their brain doesn't
need as much sleep. They have more
energy. So, um, I've been a big fan of
the creatine, um, not only for the
muscle, especially because, you know,
working out is something that's very
important, but for the brain as well.
I always thought of creatine as
something that you you took and you kind
of had to load up on, and then over a
couple of weeks or months, the effects
would kick in. But you're telling me
that if I had creatine in the morning,
that same day, I would experience
potentially improved cognition if I have
a big enough dose.
>> Yes. So, um, great question. A lot of
studies that have been done that you're
referring to have been done in the
context of exercise and muscular
performance. And the reason why people
have to load up on like they do a
loading phase, let's say 20 grams and
then they go down to this sort of
maintenance phase of five grams is
because it takes I don't know I think
it's about a month or so before you can
saturate your muscular stores of
creatine. And then
>> what does that mean? It means that um
the creatine which is actually stored in
your muscle as phosphocreatine is there
and ready to be used to make energy. So
so it takes again it takes about a month
or so to do that unless you are really
giving your muscles a high dose right.
So the five grams a day it only it can
only do it for so many days and then
finally you get saturated. When you do
this loading phase you kind of just
accelerate that whole process. And so
that's why when people are doing these
experiments where they want to test the
effects of creatine, they want they want
the participants to have really high
levels of creatine in their muscles
quick because they don't want to do a
month-long experiment, right? They want
the experiment to be like a couple of
weeks or a week. So that was kind of the
whole concept behind this loading phase.
If you're not someone who's going to
some kind of competition, you know, like
your CrossFit games or something, you
don't really need to do that loading
phase if you've already been
supplementing with five grams a day for
like a month. When it comes to the
brain, what's happening if you get above
that five grams, that's pretty much all
consumed by the muscle. You're having
some leftover in circulation and the
brain takes it up and it takes it up,
right? When it re what it really shines
is under that stressful condition, which
again for me, I feel like every day is
this is is like cognitively demanding
for me because I'm constantly, you know,
learning new material or learning new
information or working on things, right?
And so there's a lot of cognitive stress
on my brain. And so I feel like I'm
constantly under that stress. And that's
where getting the creatine in your brain
helps you make that energy quicker. And
so that's why like I've done I've had,
you know, been jetlagged and have have
to give a talk at you, you know, like
5:00 a.m. in the morning, my my
biological time after not getting sleep.
And I've done like 25 grams of creatine.
And it it's insane how much it helps me.
Again, it could be placebo because I'm
anticipating that effect, which is fine.
Placebo is a real thing. It's great. I'm
all about it. But there's some evidence
also that this works, right? That the
creatine is helping with under that
sleep deprivation and that stressful
condition.
>> I was reading about a study in 2025
where they
gave creatine to people that had
depressive symptoms alongside CBT
training. And the people that had
creatine and the cognitive behavioral
therapy training experienced a greater
improvement in their depression symptoms
than those who just received the
cognitive behavioral therapy, which is
which is incredible.
>> It's fascinating. I mean, depression is
a type of brain stress, right? I mean,
we know inflammation plays a role in in
depression. We know oxidative stress
plays a role in depression. And there
have now been some animal studies that
have shown creatine is somehow having an
anti-inflammatory effect. I that hasn't
all been worked out. So I don't know if
it's all just the energy component of
it. It could also be this other sort of
newly identified role that creatine's
playing in sort of having an
anti-inflammatory effect. And I don't
know much enough about that. I don't
know that there's enough even known
about that, but I do know that it
exists. And it's fascinating because
again I think where creatine really
shines in the brain and it's been shown
study after study is under some kind of
stressful condition depression or sleep
deprivation or there's a new study that
came out it was published I don't know a
month ago or so showing that it was a
very small pilot study and I want to
caveat this there was no placebo control
but it did show that giving people with
Alzheimer's disease creatine I believe
it was 20 grams a day did improve their
cognition. And so again, this is a whole
new field where now we're looking at
creatine in the brain, not just the gym
bros and not just the muscular effects,
but in the brain and how it's affecting
the brain and being beneficial for
cognition, for brain aging, for
depression.
>> Is there a link or an association with
cancer outcomes in creatine? Wondering
because I was there was there was a
study that I was looking at earlier.
Yeah, this one it says a a 2025 study of
25,000 people each found that for each
additional 0.09 grams of creatine over a
two-day average was linked to a 14%
reduction in cancer risk.
>> Right.
>> Which was in the Frontiers Journal and
reported by the BBC.
>> Yeah. That it's it's like a new
unexplored, you know, association here
where it's like I I don't know why
creatine is doing it. Is it the
anti-inflammatory effect? Is it who
knows? But again, I mean that I I was
aware of that study and it's like a
whole new area that needs to be explored
where you know some people were worried
about creatine actually causing cancer.
I've actually had people ask me that
question and it's actually the opposite
where it seems to be reducing cancer
risk.
>> The some of the other sort of
misconceptions around creatine are that
it's going to I mean there was this
stereotype that people take it they get
massive muscles and they become bloated.
So I think that put a lot of women off
in particular according to some research
that we actually did just to understand
perceptions of creatine in my investment
fund. But the other one was hair loss.
People think there's some sort of
association with hair loss. I.e. if you
take creatine you're more likely to lose
your hair.
>> Right. So there was this one study that
was published I don't even know how many
decades ago. Maybe you can pull it up
but it was in rugby players I believe
and these rugby players that were given
I I believe it was a high dose. Maybe it
was 20 grams. I can't remember the exact
dose but um they had increased levels of
dihydrotestosterone
DHT which is something that is linked to
androgenic alipcia. So this would be you
know basically your the the DHT can
affect the hair follicle and keep it in
this like stunted phase where it's not
growing and so that can cause hair loss.
And that one study didn't measure hair
loss. It just again looked at the the
DHT, the dihydrotestosterone levels.
It's never been replicated. There's
after so many decades, it's never had
any animal evidence showing that this
actually causes hair loss. Nothing has
really come up showing that this is
something to be concerned about. So, I
take it as, okay, it's like a one-off
thing. Who knows what was going on here?
But like, you would think if it was
real, it would be replicated after when
was it published? 2009
>> 2009.
>> Yeah. So, it was a group of rugby
players. They were given 25 grams a day
of of creatine. Um, but there was
actually a study, a randomized control
trial done in 2025, this year with 45
resistant trained men all given five
grams a day of creatine over 12 weeks.
And there was no significant difference
found in their hair outcomes or DHT
versus placebo.
>> There we go. When was that published?
>> 2025.
>> Oh, this year. randomized control
of
>> med. Well, I mean to get to get also to
your your other point about the water
weight gain. I know this is a real thing
because also several of my my
girlfriends were concerned about this as
well. And it's funny, you know, creatine
does bring water into the cell and but
that's actually a it's not a bad thing,
right? And it you're really not going to
get a big gain in weight. I mean, I
can't imagine. There's nothing more than
like two pounds,
>> you know, if if if anything at all. So,
I do think that is sort of uh something
that's I don't it's a it's a it's a fear
that's not justified in my opinion. I
mean, you lose you you gain, you know,
four pounds of water weight when you're
on your menstrual cycle.
>> Yeah. You mentioned fasting.
>> Yeah. There's been lots of conversation
around fasting, around whether it's
good, bad, how long to fast, or whether
just restricting your calories is the
same as fasting. A lot of people talk
about autophagy. My girlfriend talks
about water fasting. What is your
perspective on the role of fasting, how
we should do it, if we should do it,
when we should do it, who should do it?
>> I think it depends on what your goal is.
So you mentioned people talk about
calorie restriction and really you know
is the fasting just about the calorie
restriction and I think when it comes to
weight loss losing losing weight
predominantly hopefully fat not muscle
then calorie restriction is the main
thing to do here and intermittent
fasting is sort of a tool to get you
there. In other words, people that are
doing intermittent fasting tend to eat
fewer calories. And that's been shown in
several studies, even if they aren't
counting their calories because they are
limited in the amount of time they're
eating and then they're fasting for a
longer period of time. They end up just
consuming naturally fewer calories.
>> Being in a calorie deficit, is that
going to put you into the ketogenic
state that you get from not fasting?
>> No. Not if not necessarily. No, it's
not. So you can be in a calorie deficit,
but it it depends, right? So when you're
when you're in the fasted state, what's
important here is you're activating a
bunch of pathways that don't become
active when you're in a fed state. And
there's a lot of biochemical reactions
that sort of dictate all that. But you
mentioned autophagy, right? And and
that's the big one, and that's happening
only when you're really in a fasted
state.
>> What is it?
>> There's different types of it. So
generally speaking, it's the clearing
out of damaged stuff within your cell.
So what is damaged stuff? It can be
protein aggregates. For example, if we
think about in neurons, amaloid beta
protein aggregates. So autophagy could
play a role in clearing that out.
>> The plaques and stuff you get in your
brain.
>> Exactly. But you also get plaques in
your cardiovascular system. So autophagy
can play a role in clearing that out. Um
but it also can be fragments of DNA. It
can be, you know, all all sorts of gunk
and stuff that just can accumulate
inside of your cell. And so you're kind
of getting rid of that. Also, it can be
even on the level of, let's say,
it's the organal level. So you can
actually have your mitochondria. We
talked about mitochondria being the
major source of energy inside of our
cells. Mitochondria are very important
for the health of all of our cells, our
neurons, our muscle, because they
produce energy. But mitochondria also
accumulate a lot of damage quite easily
because they produce energy and they use
oxygen to do that. They make a lot of
what's called reactive oxygen species.
So these are things that can really
react with our DNA with proteins inside
of our our cells with with um lipids. So
the cell membranes. So your mitochondria
don't really have a repair system like
our DNA does. So we have DNA repair
enzymes that can repair damage to our
DNA, right? That's where magnesium comes
in. magnesium is required for these
enzymes to be activated to repair damage
to our DNA to prevent cancer. Our
mitochondria don't have that kind of
repair system. They have another repair
system and one of it is what's called
mphagy which is kind of a subp part of
autophagy and it's where the
mitochondria they accumulate damage. you
can essentially
take that mitochondria and get rid of
it, right? Or a piece of that
mitochondria that damage and get rid of
it through this sort of autoagy type of
thing, but it's called mopagy. And that
happens with other types of what are
called organels within our cells. So
this autophagy process, this autophagy
is sort of a general term, but it's
essentially the cleaning out of damage.
It's the repair process for damage. And
it's something that happens most the
time when we're in a fasted state, which
typically happens when we're sleeping.
>> How long do do I have to be in a fasted
state for?
>> I mean, it depends. I would say
that we haven't really worked that out
great in humans because people aren't
measure measuring biomarkers of
autophagy in humans. There have been
some studies that have looked at being
in a fasted state for like 16 hours. And
essentially once you get once you break
through that part of depleting all your
liver glycogen that's an important you
know precursor for activating autophagy.
So I mentioned earlier that happens
after about 12 hours right so as you get
to 12 13 14 15 16 hours then you're
probably getting to that state of
autophagy. Um however there's such
limited evidence evidence on that in
humans. A lot of it comes from animal
studies. With that caveat, I will say
that you can get a lot of benefits. So,
some of the metabolic benefits from
fasting include improved glucose levels,
improved um blood pressure regulation,
metabolic effects, improved for example,
weight loss. Right? Now, can you get all
of that from just doing caloric
restriction versus doing t like this
intermittent fasting? Right? You can get
a lot of it, but there have been studies
showing that doing doing this sort of
intermittent fasting is beneficial uh
for some of these metabolic parameters
outside of the caloric being in a
caloric deficit.
>> What does that mean? Metabolic
parameters
>> again glucose regulation, blood
pressure, your blood pressure control as
well. So these things have been shown in
in people that are doing timerestricted
eating. So they're basically doing a
type of intermittent fasting where
especially if they're doing a really
compressed window. So they're eating all
their food within six hours and then
fasting for like 18 hours.
That's really beneficial, right? Because
and even if they have the same amount of
calories as people that are calorically
restricted, they've compared those
head-to-head. people that are doing the
fasting have better improvements in
their glucose regulation, better
improvements in in um their blood
pressure than people that are even still
eating fewer calories but not doing the
fasting component.
>> So, what would you recommend for the
average person? I asked you earlier on
to give me a a sort of a perfect uh
a perfect prescription of what I should
do in terms of fasting
on a daily basis. Do you think I should
have eating uh sort of fasted windows
of, you know, 12 to 20 hours?
>> You know, I think it really depends on
what you're looking for. And personally,
if you are wanting to have this more
autophagy kind of potentially autophagy
activation where you're you're clearing
away stuff within your cells. Again, we
don't really know the hard number yet,
but I would say yeah, you probably want
to be around a 16
hour window of not eating.
>> What do you do?
>> I mean, it depends on the day, you know,
>> on an optimal day.
>> Most of the time, I'm I'm probably
eating all of my food within a 10-hour
window. And so, I'm fasted for 14 hours,
but optimally, like it all depends on my
family and like eating dinner with my
family and what's going on.
>> Do you ever do longer fasts? I don't do
I mean I would say a a day is like the
longest that I do but I do a lot of
exercise on top of that and so you can
kind of kick yourself into that
autophagy state a little bit more
because it's kind of like we talked
about this it's a way of sort of
supercharging your ketosis and so if
you're exercising and fasting um that
kind of supercharges that whole
autophagy system as well but um it I do
think it's a kind of an interesting idea
uh to do some longer fasts maybe once a
year, once a quarter depending
>> why
>> because you are activating that repair
process. Now you have to do resistance
training because you don't want to lose
muscle mass. Protein is important. It's
one of the signals for you know muscle
protein synthesis which is essential for
you know gaining muscle mass and
maintaining muscle mass. Right.
>> So after a fast you want to break the
fast with something protein richch.
>> Absolutely. Definitely protein rich for
sure. Um, but I think also during a fast
if you can do some kind of you want to
you want to stimulate your muscles with
mechanical force because that's the
other signal to stimulate muscle protein
synthesis. And so I I think one of the
biggest concerns people had with fasting
and this was over the last 5 years or so
is that studies have shown people that
undergo intermittent fasting tend to
lose muscle mass because they're eating
fewer meals. they're not getting as much
protein and perhaps they're not doing
resistance training. Now, there have
been other studies that have looked at
people doing intermittent fasting and
resistance training and they don't lose
muscle mass because they are doing
they're getting that mechanical
stimulation of their of their muscles
which is preventing the loss of muscle
mass. And so, I think the take-home here
is if you are doing intermittent
fasting, you want to make sure you're
getting all your protein, 1.6 1.2 to 1.6
six grams of protein per kilogram body
weight per day depending on how much
you're resistance training. And you also
you want to make sure you're getting
your protein in that small window that
you're eating. And you want to make sure
that you're doing resistance training as
well. Those are two really important
things if you are going to do
intermittent fasting.
>> There was a study I read which is linked
to that which said linked to that but
sort of adjacent that says uh in in nine
human trials they found that 23% of
people enjoyed better sleep after
intermittent fasting. which I thought
was interesting.
>> Yeah, cause causation is obviously hard
to establish there, but
>> Right. I I think and that brings us to
this other sort of aspect of
intermittent fasting, which is
timerestricted eating. Essentially, what
what's the best thing to do is really
you want to you want to eat within an
earlier time window. And there's a lot
of reasons for that. One of them is that
when you eat later in the day, let's say
8 o'clock at night, nine o'clock at
night, your body is starting starting to
naturally make melatonin.
That's a hormone that's involved in
helping you get sleepy. Well, melatonin
also inhibits the production of insulin.
And so you basically
will have elevated blood glucose levels
when you're eating later in the day
because you're you're less you're you're
basically less gluc your your glucose
regulation is impaired somewhat, right?
So it's better to try to eat your food
earlier in the day, but then there's
also this this area of you want to
probably stop eating like 3 hours before
your natural bedtime. And that does
affect sleep. So, if you think about it,
when you're sleeping, you don't want to
be digesting. Like, there's all these
things that are activated during
digestion, and that's going to affect
the way you sleep. And so, there are
some interesting studies that have found
that people sleep better if they stop
eating at least three hours before bed.
That is something that I do try to do
almost daily. And um it's also something
that was very interesting. I think a
friend of mine, Dr. Dr. Sachin Panda at
the Sulkq Institute was one of the first
people to observe that. He's got this
this app that he um has called my
circadian clock and he used he's used
this app over the years for clinical
trials where people will take a picture
of their food and it timestamps the
foods that he knows what time they're
eating and when they stop eating.
>> And and people that are part of this
trial started to send him comments
going, "Oh, I stopped eating earlier and
all of a sudden my sleep is better." And
after you start to get about 10, 20, 30
people making the same comment, you
start to go, wait a minute, there's
something here, right? And so I think he
was one of the first people to actually
um observe that that correlation between
stop eating earlier and sleeping better.
>> Well, you talked about protein earlier
when we're talking about resistance
training and fasting.
When should I Someone told me that
you're supposed to take protein straight
after you did the a resistance training
workout. Straight after you lift the
weights like 30 minutes after. Does it
matter?
>> Well, we that's what was thought I think
previously for I don't know how many
years it was thought this was there was
an anabolic window, right? Where you
want to take in this protein within 30
minutes to an hour of doing your
resistance training. And that way the
amino acids that are anabolic like
leucine are going into the muscle and
building muscle essentially, right? We
now know that it's not really an
anabolic window. It's about your daily
protein intake because what exercise is
doing, what the resistance training is
doing is it's sensitizing all your
transporters and your muscle to amino
acids. And that's that's happening over
the course of 24 hours. So you can take
that protein in within that day and it
it really still do the same thing. So I
don't think you have to slam your
protein shake within 30 minutes to an
hour. Maybe maybe if you're like a
bodybuilder and you're really trying to
get that little tiny tiny tiny
percentage, maybe you'll have a little
bit of a benefit. But generally
speaking, most people what you want to
look at is your daily protein intake
because that's essentially um the most
important thing. And the exercise itself
is sensitizing all these, you know,
transporters on your muscle that are
allowing the amino acids to come in and
build protein, increase muscle protein
synthesis.
>> Whether you are a novice or you've been
in the tax and bookkeeping industry for
years, if you want to work with an
experienced team of professionals who
are invested in your learning and
growth, there's a real career
opportunity with our sponsor, Intuit,
the maker of Turboax and QuickBooks.
Their self-paced training, Intuit
Academy, presents you with a pathway to
gain the necessary skills that you'll
need to feel confident expanding your
career within tax and bookkeeping. And
their team is extremely supportive, too,
with a large network of experienced,
credentialed professionals right by your
side as you learn and gain experience.
On top of all of this upskilling, they
also offer flexible working schedules,
whether that's full-time, part-time,
virtual, on-site, or even letting you
select your hours to grow at the pace
that you want to grow at. Intuit is
currently growing their network of tax
and bookkeeping professionals. So if you
want to build a career with them on your
own terms, just head to
intuitit.com/expert.
I'll put that on the screen. That's
I've just invested millions into this
and become a co-owner of the company.
It's a company called Ketone IQ. And the
story is quite interesting. I started
talking about ketosis on this podcast
and the fact that I'm very low carb,
very, very low sugar, and my body
produces ketones, which have made me
incredibly focused, have improved my
endurance, have improved my mood, and
have made me more capable at doing what
I do here. And because I was talking
about it on the podcast, a couple of
weeks later, these showed up on my desk
in my HQ in London, these little shots.
And oh my god, the impact this had on my
ability to articulate myself, on my
focus, on my workouts, on my mood, on
stopping me crashing throughout the day
was so profound that I reached out to
the founders of the company and now I'm
a co-owner of this business. I highly,
highly recommend you look into this. I
highly recommend you look at the science
behind the product. If you want to try
it for yourself, visit
ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off your subscription order. And
you'll also get a free gift with your
second shipment. That's
ketone.com/stephven.
And I'm so honored that once again, a
company I own can sponsor my podcast.
There's a term that you've used a few
times which I'm I'm not super well
educated on, which is insulin
resistance.
What is insulin resistance? Is that
something associated with diabetes? And
therefore, does someone like me need to
care? I don't have diabetes.
>> Okay, let's take a step back. when you
are eating something that is going to
raise your blood glucose levels, right?
You
>> so like a piece of bread or some sugar
or whatever,
>> right? So essentially, if you're
increasing that glucose spike in your in
your bloodstream, you want to have that
glucose go somewhere. You want it to go
to your muscle and or sometimes it goes
to your atapost tissue. But in order to
do that, you have to activate insulin.
And insulin then causes these
transporters that usually aren't active
to kind of come up and take in the
glucose. So insulin resistance is when
you're basically constantly constantly
activating that pathway um such that
your cells don't respond to the insulin
like they used to. And so the insulin
isn't doing its job as well. And so
essentially your blood glucose levels
stay elevated and that causes all sorts
of damage the glycation and things like
that we've talked about.
>> So it's really insulin failure.
Insulin's failing to do its job.
>> Well, it depends because you're still
making the insulin but it's essentially
not the insulin receptor isn't
responding to that insulin and so it's
it's not doing its job. Yes, it's not
doing its job. But it's different from
type 1 diabetes in in the sense where
you're type 1 diabetes, you're actually
not even making the insulin, right? So
that's very different. So yeah, insulin
is not able to do its job. But insulin
resistance and I mean there's there's so
many different diseases that it's been
linked to. But everything I think
everything is so complicated. So I don't
know that everything's due to insulin
resistance, but it's like one component
of, you know, something that's
accelerating the way you age. I had a a
light doctor in here the other day, a
sunlight doctor the other day and we
spent a lot of time talking to talking
about light and sunlight and one of the
things that I've been really fascinated
by is red light therapy over the last
couple of months. Do you do have a sort
of red light therapy routine?
>> It's interesting that you ask. So red
light therapy in the scientific
literature called photobiomodulation.
Um, I know that's a complicated word,
but you know, there's essentially a
variety of different wavelengths that
can be used to stimulate physiological
processes like mitochondria inside of
your your cells to to do stuff, right? I
now am convinced that red light therapy
plays a role in helping with skin aging.
So, I do have a mask. It helps with with
skin aging and wrinkles. There have been
enough studies now that is pretty
convincing that it does seem to improve
the way skin ages. I do think the
important thing here is the parameters
that are done. It's not just wavelength,
but it's also like the energy, so
irradiance. And so you have to kind of
look at all those parameters and make
sure you can replicate that with
whatever product that you're using.
>> What about infrared saunas?
>> Infrared saunas or traditional saunas?
>> The infrared ones.
>> Infrared. So infrared saunas are a type
of sauna that is using
it's using you know essentially infrared
radiation right infr infrared
wavelengths to heat up the body. And so
they're not very hot. So if you look at
like the ambient temperature in an
infrared sauna it goes up to like 140
degrees Fahrenheit
which is very different from a
traditional sauna. So, infrared saunas
don't have all the same benefits as a
traditional hot sauna, something that
maybe goes up to 175, 180 degrees
Fahrenheit,
unless you are staying in that infrared
sauna for like a very long time, perhaps
even twice as long as you would or more
in a traditional sauna. The interesting
thing about infrared saunas, I would
say, um, so a colleague of mine, a
collaborator of mine, Dr. Ashley Mason,
she's at UCSF and she's been doing
what's called the heat bed study and
it's an infrared sauna that is
essentially a head out heat bed. So your
whole body is in this infrared sort of
bed, but your head is out of it. So your
head's not in it. And people um she's
done she's now done a couple of studies
and the most recent study has been done
in people with major depressive
disorder. So they have depression and
these people are are doing an infrared
sauna to a pretty extreme degree. So
she's elevating their core body
temperature by around 2°. So they're
essentially getting in a somewhat
feverish state. And in order to do that,
I mean, these people are in this
infrared sauna for well over an hour. So
not like most people that are doing
infrared saunas. You're probably staying
there for like 20, 30 minutes, right? So
people are getting very very hot to the
po to the point where their core body
temperature is going up to you know
increasing to um like one one and a half
to two degrees right and she's looking
at the effects on depression and so what
she has found is kind of amazing is that
people that are doing this infrared
sauna this heatbed
and doing cognitive behavioral therapy
CBT
they are experiencing massive
anti-depressant effect. So, there's
something called the Hamilton scale,
which is like a battery of tests that
are done to assess depression.
And just to give you like um some some
sort of basis of like if you if there's
something considered clinically
significant, then you have like a
three-point change on that scale. Well,
essentially this infrared sauna plus the
cognitive behavioral therapy improved
the Hamilton scale, you know, assessment
by 16 points. And these are people that
did four or eight rounds of it. So it
was over the course of either one month
or two months. Some people just couldn't
finish it because it is pretty intense.
Like you're you're heating your body up
quite a lot and you're sitting in this,
you know, infrared sauna for over an
hour and it's it's a it's a pretty
intense. But the magnitude of effect on
the antid-depressant effect was it's
it's stunning. And this kind of all
stems back from her mentor Dr. Dr.
Charles Raison his research that um was
essentially like an infrared sauna. So
he did something this was you know back
in 2016 he did this study where he put
people in this sort of infrared sauna
like thing and it it elevated their core
body temperature again by about two two
degrees. There are people with major
depressive disorder or he gave them a
sham control. So it was kind of hot and
people were thinking they were getting
the treatment but it was actually a
placebo. Okay. It was enough for them to
think they were getting the treatment,
but it wasn't ele elevating their core
body temperature enough. And they did
one treatment of this, okay? And he
showed that the people that did one
treatment of this had an anti-depressant
effect that lasted six weeks later after
one treatment. Sham control didn't get
this beautiful study. Um, you know,
Ashley kind of followed on that study
and showed multiple sessions of it
really had an even more robust effect.
But I say this because I don't want to
like I don't want to like say infrared
saunas aren't great. However, there's a
lot of benefits that have been related
to more hot traditional types of saunas,
finished saunas, for example,
traditional saunas that are that are
hotter, right? And so you're staying in
these 175 180°ree sauna for like 20
minutes. And it's associated with, you
know, lower cardiovascular rated
mortality. So if you you're doing it
four to seven times a week um that's
associated with a 60 sorry 50% lower
cardiovascular related mortality versus
doing it one time a week or all cause
mortality it's associated with 40% lower
all cause mortality versus doing it one
time a week. So
>> what's going on there?
>> Right. Exactly what's going on there?
And so the the the really fascinating
thing to me about this deliberate heat
exposure from a sauna is that it is sort
of mimicking moderate intensity aerobic
exercise. And this has actually been
shown, it's been compared head-to-head
to moderate intensity like cycling on a
stationary bike. A lot of the
physiological responses, so your core
body temperature goes up, your heart
rate goes up, right? When you're
exercising, your heart rate goes up.
Same thing happens when you're in a hot
sauna. your heart rate goes up, your
cardiac output is increased, right? Your
blood flow is increasing. All these
things are happening and they're very
similar. Exercise, heat stress, you're
sweating, right? To cool down your your
body. So, it's a way of sort of
mimicking this moderate intensity
exercise that doesn't really happen in
an infrared sauna if you do the same
amount of time as you're doing in a hot
sauna. Now perhaps if you increase that
time it would happen but there's all
these benefits that are happening with
just doing a deliberate heat exposure
from a sauna that
seem to not only sort of mimic
cardiovascular exercise but they add on
to it. So, we were talking about
cardiorespiratory fitness and how
important that is for longevity, right?
Where there have been studies that have
looked at people that exercise on a
stationary bike or they exercise on a
stationary bike and then follow that up
with a 15-minute sauna. And it's been
shown that those people that do the
15-minute sauna on top of the exercise
have a more a higher improvement in
their cardiorespiratory fitness. They
have more improved um levels of their
their cholesterol and lipids. their
blood pressure improvements were
greater. So there's this additive effect
of adding on the deliberate heat
exposure with the exercise that isn't
happening with exercise alone. So again,
that's sort of just more evidence of
why, you know, doing a deliberate heat
exposure like a sauna. In fact, hot
tubs, that's something that's also been
shown to improve blood pressure. In
fact, a study just came out a couple of
weeks ago showing that a hot tub is very
beneficial for improving blood pressure,
for doing all the same things that a
sauna does, which is kind of exciting
because not everyone has a sauna.
>> I heard that you sometimes rehearse
important talks and studies in saunas.
>> Yeah. I mean, this started back when I
was in graduate school. Um, I used to go
to this I lived across the street from a
YMCA and I used to go to this sauna and
use the sauna before I would go into my
lab and do experiments.
And there's a couple things I noticed.
One, I was able to handle stress better.
My stress of,
you know, failed experiments, mentors
putting all this pressure on me, all
that stuff, right? If I went to the
sauna beforehand, I was very much, it's
like I was more resilient to the stress.
And that was when I started to look into
the effects on the brain. And that's
where I also am very interested in
depression research as well, right?
Because you're you're causing like brain
resilience. But um once I started to
realize like this is affecting my mood,
this is affecting my ability to handle
stress. I was using the sauna like every
day. I mean I was like religious about
it. It was crazy. I mean it was like six
to seven days a week I was going in that
sauna.
And because it was like using it every
day, you have to multitask. you only
have so much time in the day, right? And
so I'd start rehearsing my
presentations, like going through them
in my mind while I'm sitting in the
sauna with these other people from the
YMCA who probably think I'm crazy
because I'm sitting here like saying
things, but I noticed that I was able to
remember things better if I had gone
through them in my head with the heat.
And it wasn't until many, many years
later, I mean, I kept doing that. Like
even sometimes when I travel and I'm
giving a presentation or a talk, I'll
get in the hot bath in my hotel room and
I'll just lay in the hot bath and I just
go through my talk in my head or I'll
like look at my notes and like if I
forget something I'll go through it in
my head. And it wasn't until several
years later that I started looking into
the science behind that. Like there's
something going on here. What is going
on? And I found that actually when you
go into the sauna, so there's a lot of
physiological changes that happen.
Growth hormone goes up. Um, in fact, it
depending on the the temperature and
duration, growth hormone can go up
anywhere between two-fold to like
16fold, like insane levels of of growth
hormone. But there's something else that
goes up called IGF-2,
and that is associated with improving
memory and learning. And so, there have
been animal studies that have done this.
And so, I've kind of connected the dots
here and go, maybe that's why. I don't
really know why. I mean, sometimes just
like a very strong emotional response
can sort of help you remember something
>> and you are at the end of the day
causing a very strong stress response
when you're getting in the heat.
>> So, I like to use the sauna for a lot of
things. I do I do it depends on the day.
Sometimes I do it I like to do it before
bed. So, I'll do like the hot tub or the
sauna. It improves sleep. It improves my
sleep. And that has to do with the
growth hormone. It has to do with what
are called somnogenic cytoines. These
are inflam inflammatory molecules that
are made that are that cause sleepiness.
So if you think about when you're when
you're sick and you have, you know,
inflammation going on when you're when
you have an illness, you're very tired,
you're sleepy, you're producing a lot of
what are called somnogenic cytoines.
These are cytoines that are invol
inflammation molecules that are involved
in making you sleepy. Those are also
produced when you are undergoing
deliberate heat exposure like a hot tub
or and that's been shown uh as well as a
sauna. So sometimes I like to do the
sauna at night like to relax and help
help my sleep. Sometimes I like to do it
after a workout um to extend my, you
know, my workout like the study I talked
about where you're improving your
cardiory fitness as well.
>> Would you like some tea? My team can
make you some tea if you'd like some
tea.
>> I would love some loose leaf tea in a
metal cup.
>> Why Why don't you want this this tea?
what you're doing here is is tapping
into my sometimes my friends don't want
to talk to me because I'm like the
bearer of bad news, you know, where it's
like what am I what is Rhonda going to
tell me now that I shouldn't be doing
that I love doing, right? Another
obsession of mine of late has been
microlastic exposure. And I know you've
talked about this on the podcast before
and it's it's in it's in the news now. A
lot of people are sort of familiar with
microplastics, right? breakdown of
plastic particles that are tiny uh
depending on the size and getting into
our circulation. Right.
>> And when you think of microplastics, you
think of plastic. When you think of
plastic, you think, "Oh, that plastic
water bottle." Yeah. Well, I'll just
avoid that plastic water bottle, right?
What you don't realize is that
everything everything has plastic. So,
you have here this to-go coffee cup,
which I don't know how many coffees I
and teas I've had in a to-go coffee cup,
but it's hundreds. Hundreds and
hundreds. And the thing that's so
disturbing is I learned that, you know,
these many most all of these plastic I
mean, sorry, these um paper looking
coffee cups are actually lined with
plastic. They're lined with a plastic
liner to prevent like the liquid to, you
know, leeching into the paper, right?
And that plastic lining when you add
heat to it, i.e. boiling water for tea
or hot coffee, it accelerates the
breakdown of the plastic lining. So,
you're drinking microlastic beverages
and also the chemicals associated with
them. So there was this plastic study
that was done that showed heating up
plastic essentially causes these these
toxic you know plastic associated
chemicals like BPA bisphenol A which is
an endocrine disruptor. It disrupts
hormones. It sort of mimic mimics
estrogen. So you know it's it's
sometimes like called an estrogen
mimemetic. It causes that to leech into
your beverage 55 times more.
>> 55 times
>> 55fold. Yes.
>> Which is 5,500%.
>> A whole lot. Yes. And so you're talking
about drinking, you know, plastic
chemicals and microplastics.
So that was like, okay, well, fine. I'm
going to bring my mug in anytime I'm
traveling and ask them to put my coffee
in that. So I I see so many people with
these to- go, you know, paper cups and
and and they're drinking coffee in it.
And it's like it's so hard for me
because I realize it's like this plastic
soup that you're drinking. Now you have
a tea bag on top of that and that is
something that there have been over the
course of the last seven or eight years
there have been studies that have come
out that these these tea bags are
composed of made of you know there's
plastic polymers in them and so there's
thousands of microplastics that are
released in every milliliter of tea from
these tea bags and there's a variety of
different tea bags essentially all of
them release microplastics the ones
that's that that look like they won't
release them. So now, while I used to
drink a lot of tea when I'm on the go, I
I bring my own with me. I bring my own
looseleaf tea with a little, you know,
one of those little steepers that can
steep the tea. And I use that because
mostly because the heat, you know, it's
just it's accelerating that breakdown.
Yes, I'll drink plast I mean, I'll drink
water out of a plastic bottle sometimes
when I'm traveling because there's no
other options. And actually, there was a
study that just came out. I'm sure you
saw it. Did you see the study that
showed glass had higher levels? So,
water that was in glass had higher
levels of microlastic than water that
was in plastic containers. This was a
study that came out of France.
>> Oh, come on.
>> You didn't see this study?
>> No.
>> Oh my gosh. This is like everywhere.
Everywhere. I mean, it came out, I don't
know, in the last two weeks or so. Um,
the study came out of France and it was
essentially showing that glass bottles
had more microplastics in the liquid
that they contained than plastic bottles
which contain liquid. And you might go,
"What? That makes no sense, right? I
mean, why would the glass have plastic
particles at a higher level than a
plastic bottle?"
Well, it turns out that the paint on top
of the lid of the glass bottle
has is it has plastic polymers in it.
And so the paint is flaking off and
getting into the water that is contained
in the glass bottle. There is I think a
silver lining here and that is well okay
there might be more microplastics in the
beverages that are in the glass bottle
compared to the plastic bottle but the
size matters. So it was shown that the
size is larger in the glass bottles
compared to the plastic bottles and
>> the size of the plastic
>> the the size of the microplastic. And
there's a reason why this is important
because microlastics and nanoplastics as
you get smaller in size they get
smaller. They're called nanoplastics.
Those are the most dangerous because it
can be more easily absorbed in the gut
and get into the circulation. If it gets
into circulation, it can more easily
bypass the bloodb brain barrier and get
into the brain. Size matters and so the
larger size flaking off from the paint
is less likely to be absorbed by the gut
and to get into circulation. Now, this
has to be shown. I'm sure that's going
to this study is going to be done next.
Like, this is going to be the next
study. It hasn't been shown yet.
>> I've heard you talk about fiber as well
playing a role in getting microplastics
out of our body.
>> Okay. So, yes. So, fiber is interesting.
This all comes from animal studies. And
fiber seems to play a role in the
absorption of microplastics and
nanoplastics in your gut cells. And
that's really important because if you
don't absorb them, it's excreted through
feces, right? And it's been shown we
only absorb about 1 to 2% of these
microplastics that we're ingesting.
Fiber, what it does is two things. One,
it moves the microplastics through the
intestines quicker, right? Which is what
fiber does. But I think the more
important thing is the type of fiber. So
you want this fermentable type of fiber,
soluble fiber. That's the kind of fiber
that's really good for your gut
microbiome. And what that does is it's
essentially creating this viscous
gel-like sort of gel-like, you know,
mucousy stuff inside of your gut that
encapsulates the microplastic so that it
can't be absorbed by the gut, you know,
what are called the gut epithelial
cells. And so if you're essentially not
able to absorb those microplastics, then
they're not getting into circulation.
And that's like the biggest thing that
you can do, right? Is is not get them
into circulation. Now, this is all based
on animal evidence. I did speak with
with a microplastics researcher at a
Harvard, Dr. um Carrie Nadal, and she
wasn't even aware of this, and now she's
like on it. So, I'm hoping that there'll
be some human human evidence coming soon
looking at whether or not microplastics,
if you're eating fiber, if that can
basically blunt the absorption of the
microplastics into the system. I think
people that are eating more fiber in
their diet probably are getting less of
that microplastics into their into their
system, but that hasn't been shown in
humans. It's only been shown in animals.
>> I'm guessing you don't eat canned soup
either.
>> Yes. Yeah. So the canned soup is
interesting. You know, again,
aluminum cans are lined with this
plastic, you know, lining and that
prevents the the sort of breakdown of
the of the the aluminum, right, the
metal.
Uh unfortunately it also causes these
chemicals like BPA that are in the
plastic lining to leech into the in this
case the soup or the beverage or the
liquid that they're contained in. Right?
There was this study that showed I think
it was was it a th00and% increase of BPA
after drinking a soup out of a can
versus a soup out of a glass. A
thousand% increase in bisphenol A
levels. I mean that is
>> bisphenol A levels being
>> BPA
>> which is the bad thing in microplastics.
>> It's the it's one of the bad chemicals
in plastics that is an endocrine
disruptor. So it's disrupting hormones
and you know that can play a role in a
lot of different things um depending on
what we're looking at. So it's hugely
important for obviously like
neurodedevelopment in children. So like
pregnant women but even like you know
disrupting disrupting hormones in
general like mimicking estrogen I mean
that's not something that guys want to
do either right so it does it is
something to be aware of but the thing
is is that you know BPA it was this
beautiful marketing strategy that came
out I don't know how many years ago but
all this BPA was replaced with something
else that wasn't BPA it was BPS and so
now everything is marketed as BPA free
And people think that is like, oh, oh,
it's not dangerous. It's BPA free.
However, what it's replaced with is
doing the same thing as BPA, if not
worse. And that's been now shown in
multiple studies. So, it's also an
endocrine disruptor. It's doing the same
thing. And yet, people think, you know,
that it's it's safe because it's BPA
free.
>> Did you hear about this study of people
that live close to a golf course?
>> Yes.
Yeah. There's a study that came out, I
don't know how, it was very recent,
maybe a month
>> 2025.
>> Yeah. So maybe I think it was a couple
months ago, and the study showed that
people that lived near within a mile or
so of golf courses had a much higher
incidence of Parkinson's disease. Right.
>> It says 126% higher risk,
>> right? Okay. So then why is that? Right.
Okay. And this is where I want to get
into the the pesticides issue because
it's it's known like any scientist
that's done research in neurogenerative
disease. It's one of the ways that you
induce Parkinson's disease in animals is
you give them insect. You give them
essentially a pesticide. So rotinone
being one, paraquat. And what that does
is a mitochondrial toxin. So it's it's
basically causing the mitochondria to
die and then essentially when the
mitochondrias are are dying or
apoptosing you know the cell under goes
apoptosis and dying. So you're
essentially you can induce Parkinson's
disease in mice by giving them these
types of essentially you know these
types of insecttoides and herbicides. So
it's well known that that can cause you
know Parkinson's disease. It's important
to know that it's mostly the ingestion
of it and not the inhalation of it. And
that was a big concern because it gets
into the water source and that's what's
thought to be the underlying cause.
People that are living close to a golf
course, it's getting into it's
contaminating the water source
essentially. And so people are are
drinking these these you know this
basically these pesticides, insecticides
and herbicides, right? So, um, a water
filter like a reverse osmosis, you know,
water filter, something like that that
can filter out some of these molecules,
hugely important. And I think that's the
solution to people that are living near
a golf course or people that are living
near any to sort of agricultural place
where they're using a high volume of
these types of, you know, herbicides.
>> What is the most important thing we
haven't talked about that we should have
talked about? run.
>> I think we talked a little bit about
magnesium, but I don't know that we
talked enough about magnesium and it is
important because it's something that is
required for
gosh over 300 different enzymes in your
body need it to function properly. So,
it's what's called a co-actor and I
mentioned DNA repair enzymes. So,
there's it's also used to make energy.
So, you need magnesium to make energy
and to use energy. You need magnesium to
repair damage that's happening all the
time. And close to 50% of the population
in the United States does not have
adequate levels of magnesium because
they're not eating the foods that they
need to to get the magnesium. Dark leafy
greens. I mentioned it's at the center
of a chlorophyll molecule. There have
been studies that have shown that for
every 100 millgram decrease in magnesium
intake, there's a 24% increase in
pancreatic cancer incidents and that's
in a dose dependent manner. So you keep
going up and up. I think that people
don't realize that they're not getting
enough magnesium. Magnesium is required
to make to turn vitamin D3 into the
steroid hormone. So some people have a
magnesium, you know, insufficient amount
of magnesium they're taking in and
they're actually not able to make enough
vitamin D into that steroid hormone.
Again, magnesium is controlling 300
enzymes. Some of those enzymes are
actually the ones that are converting
vitamin D3 into the steroid hormone. So
magnesium is hugely important. It's
something that can be easily corrected.
The deficiency can be easily corrected
by taking a supplement but also eating
more leafy greens which is the best
source of magnesium. The question is
what do supplements do? What kind of
supplement do you take? How much should
you take? All these things are I think
questions that people are interested in.
>> So I've got some magnesium here. Is um
is taking magnesium going to have a
positive role then on my my speed of
aging?
>> I do think so. I think so. Yes. We
talked about cancer incidents, right?
Magnesium. So, I think magnesium is one
of those sort of minerals that is c when
you when you don't have enough of it,
it's causing that insidious damage over
time that accumulates and then rears its
ugly head, you know, in the fifth,
sixth, seventh decade of life. And that
ugly head happens to be cancer. So I do
think that if you are able to avoid
magnesium deficiency and insufficiency,
then you are going to be able to
basically make sure there's enough
magnesium around for everything in your
body to use it with with what it needs
it for. So um
>> and I've heard you say that 50% of
people are deficient in the United
States in magnesium,
>> right? Close to 50%. And not to mention,
you just talked about, you know,
electrolytes. athletes, they actually
require between 10 to 20% more magnesium
than the general population because of
their magnes their magnesium losses are
so great and so they can be even more
deficient. Magnesium is needed for red
blood cells and so you know people can
have lower energy as well. So,
magnesium, magnesium is so important for
so many different things. And you know,
like I said, I think there I do think
there's a trade-off here where whatever
magnesium you are getting from your
diet, if you're not getting enough of
it, it's probably going to make energy
instead of being used to repair damage
because you need to make energy every
day, right? That's the most important
thing. If you don't make energy, you
die. Like, you can't survive. So
whatever magnesium your body is getting,
it's not going to that process of
repairing DNA, which doesn't really
matter until you're in your, you know,
fifth, sixth, seventh decade of life and
cancer, you know, risk increases, right?
And so there's this idea, this put out
by my mentor Dr. Bruce Ames, called
triage theory. And he's shown some
evidence of it. Magnesium is one of them
where magnesium seems to be triaged to
energy production at the expense of
repairing your DNA.
>> What does that mean? It means that if
you're not getting enough magnesium
through your dietary intake and you're
not supplementing with it, whatever
magnesium that you're getting, there's
300 different enzymes that need it to do
their function that your body is finding
a way to triage it to the most essential
functions that are going to basically
help with short-term survival.
>> Triage means it's basically allocating
>> Yes. It's allocating it to the the
processes inside your body that are
essential for short-term survival right
now.
>> Long-term health, diseases of aging,
like cancer, that doesn't matter as
much, right?
>> If you're deficient,
>> yeah, your body your body basically
says, "No, I don't I'm not going to give
whatever precious magnesium I have right
now to prevent cancer because I need to
live long enough to reproduce and pass
on my genes." And cancer doesn't happen
until I'm well well past that. Right? So
this idea, it's called the triage theory
and he's he it's been shown for um
several different micronutrients.
Another one is vitamin K. So vitamin K
is really high in dark leafy greens.
Well, what Bruce Bruce um has shown is
that vitamin K is important for a couple
of things. One, it's important for blood
coagulation, blood clotting, and that
all happens in the liver. You activate
proteins in the liver for blood
clotting. If you don't have vitamin K,
you can't do that, right? It's it's one
of the reasons why when a baby's first
born, they give it a vitamin K shot so
that they have blood coagulation.
>> On your YouTube channel, you made a
video about magnesium, which I recommend
everybody goes and watches if you are
interested in going deeper on this
subject. And um on your YouTube, I found
a stat that said for every 100 milligram
drop in magnesium intake is linked to a
24% higher risk of pancreatic cancer.
>> Yes.
>> Which is shocking. It is. And again, it
comes down to the DNA repair enzymes
that are that require magnesium to be
activated. And if over a lifetime,
you're part of that 50% of the
population in the United States that
doesn't get enough magnesium, then
you're talking about not being able to
repair damage to your DNA over decades.
And essentially what that means is, you
know, at some point damage happens to
your DNA in the right part of a gene
that is what's called encogenic. it's
cancer-causing and so eventually it's
going to cause cancer if you're not able
to repair that damage, right? And so
getting enough magnesium is important to
make sure you're repairing that damage.
And um it's not only important for
cancer, but also all cause mortality. So
there's also studies showing that people
with the highest magnesium levels have a
40% lower all-c cause mortality than
people with the lowest magnesium levels.
and they have a 50% lower cancer related
mortality compared to people with the
lowest levels. So again, cancer is still
in there and we're seeing that magnesium
intake is very important with respect to
cancer. And that is something that, you
know, people don't realize when they're
not getting enough of magnesium in their
diet, they're not eating their leafy
greens or they're not taking a
supplement that they're sort of
affecting their long-term risk of
cancer. So people with high magnesium
levels have a 50% lower risk of cancer
death than those with low levels,
>> right?
>> H and is that you you obviously can't do
like a double blind placebo control test
on that. So they're they're really
establishing causation. So it could be
other things like it could be the other
dietary factors that go into go into
that. Maybe if we think about causation,
people that eat a lot of hamburgers
don't have a lot of like leafy greens.
>> Exactly. You nailed it. Um, essentially,
magnesium is packaged in these foods
that are beneficial like dark leafy
greens. And there's so many other
benefits along with them that you can't
establish causation and say, "Aha, it's
just the magnesium." I would argue it's
probably not just the magnesium, but
magnesium does play an important role.
It's just you can't of course pinpoint
it to just magnesium because you're
right there are many other important
healthy things in these micronutri in
these plants that are beneficial for
health as well.
>> There was a really random thing that I
think parents might appreciate us
talking about which was when I was
looking at your work you mentioned this
chemical that if parents take while
their baby is inside them mothers take
the baby is smarter.
>> Yes. Choline.
>> Choline.
>> Choline. Yeah, choline is an essential
nutrient that is it's really
concentrated in egg yolk. That's a
really good source of choline, but it's
important for
it's a precursor for the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine.
It's also important for producing all
these epigenetic changes called
methylation that regulates the way our
genes are expressed. And it's also um
very important for our cells like the
membranes of our cells and it it makes
something called phosphotidyl choline.
It's doing so many things is the point
I'm getting to. I don't want to get into
all this nitty-gritty because people can
get lost in that. But the point is that
peg women that were given like the RDA
close to the RDA it was like 500.
>> What's the RDA? the recommended daily
allowance. Actually, I think in this
case it was the DRRI, the the dietary
recommended intake. So, pregnant women
were were given close to what is the
dietary recommended intake. So, they
were given 480 milligrams a day of
choline or they were given almost double
that. So, they were given 930
milligrams a day. And I don't remember
what trimester uh they started in but
they were given this you know throughout
a certain time frame and during
pregnancy and then a variety of
cognitive tests were done after the
child was born. And the children that
were given the mothers that had children
that were given the really high choline
intake the 930 milligrams scored better
on all these IQ tests. And so
essentially their children were smarter
if they if they if their mother had
taken choline throughout pregnancy. And
I think this is really interesting
because it's the one easy thing that
people can do. They can supplement with
choline andor they can eat a lot of eggs
with egg yolk which is something I I did
both during pregnancy. I was eating
probably like six eggs a day and
supplementing with choline. So I was
doing both. And um every mo every mother
wants to think or every parent wants to
think that their child is smart. But
>> I bet your child is smart.
>> He's a smart cookie. Yeah.
>> How old is he now? Almost 10.
>> Seven.
>> Seven. Okay. We have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for. And
the question left for you.
Interesting.
If you could go back and change one
thing about your life, what would it be?
And you cannot say nothing. That's what
it says.
>> I would say the one thing that I would
change, I'm 47 years old, just turned 47
last month. I have one child.
And I think if I could go back in time,
I would change my decision to only have
one child and I would have another
child.
>> Why?
Because
I love being a mother. I love the joy
that children bring
to your life is it's unexplainable until
you experience it. Everything about it,
helping shape them, learning with them,
going through hard times and
experiences, but also experiencing the
joys.
I regret sort of you know I had children
later in life because I was really
pursuing my career and
it is definitely challenging being an
entrepreneur that's a mother. I made a
decision that I was going to have one
child because I wouldn't be able to do
as much of what I love doing outside of
being a mother if I had more than one
child. And now I realize that say that
when I'm older and closer to dying,
I know now that
I'm not going to think about doing one
more podcast when I'm on my deathbed.
I'm going to think about all the
experiences I've had with my family. And
I do I do have a pretty balanced I would
say balanced personal life and family
life with my career.
I don't know that it was the easiest
decision to make where I had to sort of
give up some of my intellectual pursuit,
some of my entrepreneurial my
productivity essentially.
I had to give some of that up to to to
be the best mother that I wanted to be
to be present with my husband and my my
son and enjoy everything that I enjoy
because that takes time. and that time
that I'm with them, I am not doing my
podcasting or my research or any of
that, right? And I'm happy with that
decision. And in fact, I would even give
up more of it for another child. Um, and
that's a very personal thing that I'm
discussing. So hopefully
I'll be okay with it.
>> It's not the first time I've heard this.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. No. Yeah, it's not the first time.
I I hear this a lot which is fascinating
to me from from high performance women.
>> It is it's you know
I say that it's very hard to be a very
high performing female and mother at the
same time. Uh you either have to
sacrifice being present with your family
or your health because you don't sleep
as much. uate, you know, you're you're
basically
not going to be getting as much sleep
because you're going to be working
rather than sleeping during some of the
those hours, right? So, I do I do think
that it is very challenging and I'm not
saying that um there aren't really high
performing mothers out there, but it is
it is a very difficult thing to do.
>> When you say you you made the choice to
have one, was that an intentional
choice? I you and your partner did
family planning and said we want one or
was it because you said your child is
seven you said you're 47 so at 40
obviously it's it's becomes a little bit
more tricky than it than it does when
your 30s to conceive
>> right so I think what in in my case um I
I got pregnant when I was 38 for the
first time and I gave birth when I was
>> so I was pretty late already
>> and at that point
I didn't you know as I It was I was so
overwhelmed and my productivity had gone
down so much just from that event
>> that I was worried that I wouldn't be
able to keep it up if I did another one
right away, which I had to do because I
had waited so long. Now, why did I wait
so long? I was pursuing my career, you
know? I mean, and I would argue now that
I could have had a kid in graduate
school. I could have had a child as a
post-doal fellow, but again, it's one of
those things where you just you keep you
want to like get through this milestone
and then this milestone and then you
want everything to be perfect and you
start to like this perfectionism can
sometimes be a double-edged sword,
right? Yeah.
>> Where your perfectionism then is like,
okay, well, you're you're going to have
a trade-off here. Yeah.
>> And that trade-off for me was my
reproductive lifespan. You know, I'm I
was older when I started having
children. know there's a lot of
technologies out there now that can help
with that but at you know 47 it's I
would say not looking good.
>> Uh I think I ask about this and I'm
curious about this because me and my
partner I'm 32. She's turned 33 last
week. We don't have any kids. We've been
together for almost seven years now I
think. And so you can imagine in my life
how easy it would be to make excuses
that I need to get through this year
because this big thing's happening or
I'm moving to LA so now's not the right
time. And then she's got her business
going on so now is not the right time
for her and she's traveling and doing
these retreats around the world so
that's not perfect timing. And then
because of this podcast, I've played the
scenario forward because I get to meet
people who are a little bit further down
the line than me. And I get to ask them
about their regrets and the decisions
they wish they'd made and were they
intentional about fat family planning,
did they wish they'd done it earlier?
And the thing it's changed in me is it's
made me realize that to start the
process, if it's something I want to do
well before I'm ready because there is a
there whether we like it or not, there
is a biological clock. And the thing
that I've observed in the guests,
specifically high performance women,
whether you Ronda Rousey, the UFC
champion, who I sat and interviewed and
who was in tears talking about her
failed IVF for the I don't know the
fifth, sixth, seventh time, or other
women that have sat here and interviewed
and looked in their faces is the regret
of having that decision taken taken away
from you is going to be much much worse
than
the inconvenience
of the choosing an imperfect time to
have the kid. So, funnily enough, I w I
don't people don't really know this cuz
I don't talk about this, but I walked
away from this podcast a couple just
after hearing this story over and over
again and I went to the women in my
lives and I was like, it's like super
annoying being that guy cuz especially
as a guy saying it, I'm like, by the
way, family planning as early as
possible is probably a good idea. and
whether that means freezing your eggs or
freezing your embryos or just giving
yourself the option in the future um is
probably a good idea. And it was so
interesting to actually see the reaction
to me saying that to some of the women
in my life that I care about like my,
you know, my siblings or my partner
because upon saying it, it wasn't
incredibly wellreceived because
I think it's a confronting thing to say
to somebody
because there's a bit of a stigma
associated with like freezing your eggs
and IVF and freezing your MBOS's. And
even with my partner, the first time I
said it to her, it was it was almost as
if I was like insulting a little bit,
insulting her. That's almost the the how
I thought she took it for the first
three or four minutes. But then when I
explained what I was saying by like give
let's give ourselves the option when
we're older, you know, if you know,
let's just give ourselves the option.
And also, if you go through these
procedures when you're younger, you have
higher quality yield from the eggs you
freeze or the embryos you freeze. Let's
just give ourselves the option. And then
she kind of turned 5 minutes into the
conversation and then she got super
excited about it like 15 minutes in and
now we're like super excited. So like
we're we're trying to conceive but also
we're going to be freezing our eggs and
freezing embryos in this year in
September because and I've just tried to
be a really big influence to the women
in my life to like give yourself the
option. And I say this because I've seen
the regret on this podcast and that's
what I'm saying. And I think all I think
all people that can and I know it's
expensive as early as you can should
consider the fact that we live in a
world that is driving productivity that
is making us work later and later in
life that is making us more obsessed
with our careers and without us really
knowing it there is a clock and it's
robbing us of the option to make family
planning decisions.
>> 100% agree. I I can't I can't agree
more. Exclamation exclamation everything
you just said. I mean, if I had frozen
my eggs or we had done, you know, IVF
and frozen embryos that were viable and
healthy, then we'd have the option,
right? I mean, it's it's it's it's so
true. And I don't know. I think I think
I was just really blinded by and
overwhelmed by, you know, how much work
I have to do and thinking, "Oh, there's
no way I could do more than one."
Because, again, I when I'm a mother, I
go all in.
>> Yeah.
>> When I'm a podcaster, I go all in.
That's exactly,
>> you know, it's not just, you know, when
I have a guest on, like I really like I
need to like be really interested in
them and, you know, so there's it's all
in, but not giving myself that option is
a big regret, you know, where at least
if I had frozen my eggs down, then I
would be at a point now this if I had
done this, you know, when I was 39 or 40
or even if I had done it the first time,
you know, when I was earlier in my 30s,
I should have done that, you know, but
um I just didn't have the foresight
enough to to do that and I and I do
regret it. So, it's great. It's great
that you talk about it to the the women
you that are in your life and even on
the podcast.
>> We're really bad at forecasting the fact
that we will change
this. And I think this is like really at
the heart of it. Like we're really bad
at forecasting the fact that our current
state of mind might not be our future
state of mind. But you've only got to
look backwards in your life and realize
how different you are and how you think
and what your priorities were. I was in
nightclubs at 18 and 19. I there's
nothing for me going to a nightclub now
be like a form of like it'd be like
waterboarding me. It'd be like torture.
I changed and so at like 35 at 40 45
there's a high probability that I'm
going to have a different perspective
than the one I have now. So give myself
the option at 45 to like you
know so that's kind of how I think about
it and I say this out publicly because I
just think I don't like I don't like
seeing that regret in people.
>> It's hard. Yeah, it it's definitely
hard. Thankfully, I do have this joy in
my life and I'm so glad I have that.
But,
>> and I have to acknowledge the fact that
many people even if they did want the
option for fertility reasons can't have
children. So, um it's not still not an
option for everybody because there are,
you know, people have certain health
complications and um other issues which
prevent them from having kids even if
they wanted to and even if they're young
and I've got friends in my life that
unfortunately are in that situation. But
yeah, thank you so much for the work
that you do. It's um it's really really
important work in part because you're so
unbelievably engaging, but you're so
because of your obsession, you're so
unbelievably rigorous and in the detail
of the things you talk about. And as you
said, there's so many people around the
world, and I know because we we meet
them wherever we go in the world that
don't have access to this information
like they're not going to be on PubMed
reading through the journals and trying
to distill these big words. And I think
you do a brilliant job of educating many
many millions of people in every corner
of the world through your YouTube
channel and your Instagram etc. and um
making these like complicated things
accessible and if if if you're
successful in that which you very much
are you're you're tilting the trajectory
of their life but also therefore their
future and their kids' lives and their
kids' kids' lives and um and that's a
really wonderful thing and we need more
public educators like you that have the
talent of articulation and engagement
that you do. There's they're very very
rare and hard to come by. I do a podcast
where I look at all these people and
you're like the very very best at it and
you've done it for so unbelievably long
and that's why. So, thank you so much
for educating us and allowing us to live
the future that uh that'll be most
conducive with our health and happiness.
>> Well, thank you so much Stephen for the
really engaging conversation and for
asking the hard questions.
>> Thank you.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show. So, could I ask you for a favor?
If you like the show and you like what
we do here and you want to support us,
the free simple way that you can do just
that is by hitting the subscribe button.
And my commitment to you is if you do
that, then I'll do everything in my
power, me and my team, to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week. We'll listen to your feedback.
We'll find the guests that you want me
to speak to, and we'll continue to do
what we do. Thank you so much.
[Music]
Heat. Heat. N.